THE WHITE HOUSE   Office of the Press Secretary  _____________________________________________________________________   FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE                                        March 4, 2009     Reform Agendas at the Departments of Agriculture and Homeland Security   Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack and Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano today discussed their efforts to cut costs and make government more efficient and effective.    Listed below is an overview of the measures they have implemented at their agencies to save money and better serve the American people.   Reform Agenda at the Department of Agriculture    One of Secretary Vilsack’s first actions was to ask each acting member of his sub-cabinet and in turn each staff person at the Department of Agriculture, to seek out, execute and report on "savings" each week. The following are specific examples of financial savings that have been or will be realized at the department.    The Rural Development Mission Area saved $4300 in unnecessary travel to the National Cooperative Association Meeting in Hawaii, by simply redirecting staff assignments.    The Office of Civil Rights combined two costly training conferences and scheduled them for 2010, saving approximately $89,000 for fiscal year 2009.    The Office of the Chief Financial Officer has partnered with US Bank to modernize and improve the utility payment processes by providing a web based transaction visibility and transparency to USDA and Agency stakeholders. This will aid in the tracking of payments, aiding in the recovery and elimination of improper late penalties and provide value added services to produce agency cost savings. The labor cost savings that will be realized for USDA in the first year will be $670,500. Additional savings will be realized from the elimination of unused accounts through the use of this new system.    Rural Development has been utilizing Webex training in place of in-person training when possible to reduce unnecessary travel and per diem costs. The projected estimated annual savings is $1.3 million.    The Office of the Chief Financial Officer National Finance Center has been selected to provide data center hosting services for USDA’s new financial system, the Financial Management Modernization Initiative. Under this contract, NFC will be providing full hosting services to include hardware, system software, engineering services, system administration, security, operations and maintenance and disaster recovery. Estimated savings will be $17.5 million.    Research Education and Economics mission area cancelled one, and greatly reduced the scope of another existing agreement for services that were no longer required, saving over $400,000 that can be applied to mission critical operations elsewhere in the REE agencies.    During 2009, Rural Development anticipates the resolution of 16 EEO complaints as a result of settlement or alternative dispute resolution process. At an estimated cost of $10,000 for processing per complainant, the savings are estimated at a total of $160,000.    The Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) has modified planned travel and conferences over the course of the next several weeks representing a cost savings of over $30,000. These savings were attained primarily through the use of information technology, changing the number of staff travelling to a given event, or creation of training materials in-house rather than using a vendor.    Reform Agenda at the Department of Homeland Security    Secretary Napolitano ordered an Efficiency Review across the Department of Homeland Security last month – an effort that will make the Department work better by promoting efficiency, reducing duplication, and improving customer service in DHS functions.   Making government more efficient and effective is an important, non-partisan issue. Government has a responsibility to be a good steward of taxpayer dollars – Americans expect this, and this duty is reflected in President Obama’s goals for fiscal responsibility.   Ongoing examples have shown how even smaller efforts at DHS can find significant efficiencies:  Improving Customer Service – A radio frequency identification system that went live last week at the San Ysidro Port of Entry in California expedites the crossing of low-risk, pre-screened individuals, resulting in greater convenience for the public and more efficient time allocation for CBP.   Building Design – CBP is working with GSA on standardizing building designs for ports of entry, which will result in costs savings, as well as operational and maintenance efficiencies.   Technology – DHS Science & Technology partnered with Secret Service, industry, and academia to digitize over 9,000 ink samples improving investigation of criminal and terrorist activities and reducing matching times from days to minutes.    DHS is a young department with many opportunities for greater efficiency. Efficiency Review will look at improving efficiency on a number of fronts within the Department:  Use of contractors – The use of contractors is often not as efficient as the use of employees, and contractors are overused at DHS. There was a greater need for contractors while DHS was being established, but the Department will make an effort to transfer administrative and program management functions to employees.   Acquisition workforce – The Department will work to improve the procurement process by building a professional acquisition workforce with expertise, thus reducing reliance on contractors for program management.   Troubleshooting – DHS has established an in-house Operational Test and Evaluation (OTE) capability that will address operational problems and issues with user-friendliness, identifying and correcting them before a system is implemented, as opposed to addressing issues after the fact.   Independent cost estimation – DHS is also starting, for the first time, to do independent cost estimations for major acquisitions. This will help prevent delays and cost overruns by making sure costs are well-vetted and trade-offs are known early in a project, when schedules can still be set and adjustments can be made.      For Immediate Release  March 4, 2009   Contact:  Janet Slaughter Eissenstat   THE WHITE HOUSE ANNOUNCES REGIONAL FINALISTS FOR THE 2009-2010 CLASS OF WHITE HOUSE FELLOWS   WASHINGTON, DC – The White House announced today that 108 outstanding men and women from across the country have been selected as Regional Finalists for the White House Fellows Program. Founded in 1964 by President Lyndon Johnson, the White House Fellows Program is the nation's most prestigious program for leadership and public service.   This year's Regional Finalists represent a broad cross-section of professions, including technology, education, health care, state government, engineering, business, consulting, law, the non-profit sector, and the military. A complete list of the Regional Finalists is included below.   During March and April 2009, Regional Finalists will participate in a rigorous interview process. Based on the results of these interviews, approximately thirty candidates will be named National Finalists. The President's Commission on White House Fellowships will interview the National Finalists in June 2009 and then recommend candidates to President Barack Obama for a one-year appointment as White House Fellows.   White House Fellows spend a year working as full-time, paid special assistants to senior White House Staff, Cabinet Secretaries and other top-ranking government officials. Fellows also participate in an education program consisting of roundtable discussions with renowned leaders from the private and public sectors and trips to study U.S. policy in action both domestically and internationally.   Selection as a White House Fellow is highly competitive and based on a record of remarkable professional achievement early in one's career, evidence of leadership potential, a proven commitment to public service, and the knowledge and skills necessary to contribute successfully at the highest levels of the Federal government. Fellowships are awarded on a strictly non-partisan basis. The program has fostered a legacy of leadership, with nearly 600 alumni who are respected leaders. Alumni include former Secretary of State Colin Powell, CNN Chief Medical Correspondent Dr. Sanjay Gupta, Travelocity CEO Michelle Peluso, and Dallas Mayor Tom Leppert.     2009-2010 White House Fellows Regional Finalists:     Chisaraokwu N. Asomugha               Hamden, CT Laura M. Bacon                                Cambridge, MA Andrew J. Baldwin                            Washington, DC Komal Bazaz Smith                          Arlington, VA Scott A. Berkowitz                            Columbia, MD Trevor P. Blair                                 San Diego, CA Eric H. Blinderman                           New York, NY Jeremy N. Block                               Durham, NC Christina Boiler                                New York, NY Jacquelyn R. Bonner                         Washington, DC Sudip K. Bose                                  Chicago, IL Nicole E. Campbell                           Brooklyn, NY Dimitri C. Cassimatis                        Landstuhl, Germany Robert C. Castelli                             Southern Pines, NC Sreekanth K. Chaguturu                    Boston, MA Carolyn N. Choi                                Los Altos, CA Aysha A. Chowdhry                          Chevy Chase, MD Bowen Chung                                   Santa Monica, CA David W. Cooper                              Waldorf, MD Chad A. Crank                                 Little Rock, AR Gery B. Cummings                            Manhattan, KS Luqman K. Dad                                Buffalo, NY Amar A. Desai                                 Westlake Village, CA Kyle W. Dietrich                                Southlake, TX John E. Ethridge                               Alexandria, VA Jose M. Fernandez                           San Francisco, CA Jonathan J. Finer                              New Haven, CT Theodore S. Fish                              Santa Fe, NM Eric T. Fleckten                                Kirkville, NY David C. Foley                                 Clarksville, TN Daniel P. Gallagher                          Havertown, PA Rebekah E. Gee                               Philadelphia, PA Elisha P. Gilliam                               Baltimore, MD Victor J. Glover                                Ridgecrest, CA Shawn-Pavan M. Golhar                    Santa Monica, CA John T. Green                                  San Diego, CA Peter F. Halvorsen                           Norfolk, VA Kenneth E. Harbaugh                       Hamden, CT Sarah A. Harris                                Indianapolis, IN Garry A. Harsanyi                            Princeton, NJ Alexander J. Hartemink                    Durham, NC Kellie M. Hawkins                             Los Angeles, CA Michael J. Hillyard                            Jacksonville, FL Zheng Y. Huang                               San Jose, CA Ellen C. Hunter                                Atlanta, GA Erica L. Jacquez Santos                    Lakewood, CA Kellee T. James                               Chicago, IL Sarah S. Johnson                              Cambridge, MA Timothy Johnson                              Crofton, MD Joanna T. Katzman                          Abuja, Nigeria Moushumi M. Khan                           Ann Arbor, MI Maureen E. Kinder                           Washington, DC Michael E. Kopko                             Fort Lauderdale, FL Robert E. Kopp                                Princeton, NJ Benjamin L. Kornell                          Palo Alto, CA Emma L. Kurnat-Thoma                   Bethesda, MD H Clay Lyle                                      Woodbridge, VA Robert K. Lyman                              Niceville, FL James H. Mackey                             Brussels, Belgium Anish P. Mahajan                             Los Angeles, CA Mehret Mandefro                             Philadelphia, PA Brett H. Mandel                               Philadelphia, PA Ann T. Maxwell                                Santa Barbara, CA Loren Z. McArthur                            Lexington, MA Matthew Meyer                                Brooklyn, NY Emil G. Michael                                Miami Beach, FL Suzanne M. Miller                             Washington, DC Lisa K. Miller                                    South Orange, NJ Kristin E. Misner                               New York, NY James H. Moran                               Washington, DC Katherine Mossman                          Palmdale, CA Ali Nouri                                          Washington, DC James E. O'Harrah                           Fernandina Beach, FL Patrick H. O'Mahoney                       Corpus Christi, TX Collin P. O'Mara                               Berkeley, CA Abimbola T. Omoniyi                       New York, NY Obinna A. Onyeagoro                       New York, NY Brandon D. Parker                           Montgomery, AL Allen J. Pepper                                Springfield, VA Omar M. Rashid                              Richmond, VA Kyle A. Rasmussen                          Mason, OH Kristin A. Resnansky                        New York, NY Kendric H. Robbins                         Iraq Cindy L. Rodriguez                          Lutz, FL Allison I. Rogers                              Providence, RI Matthew A. Rojansky                       Washington, DC Adam R. Rosenthal                         San Diego, CA Mark A. Rothert                              Canton, IL Anthony L. Russell                           Stafford, VA Manish K. Sethi                               Brookline, MA Minesh P. Shah                               Bronx, NY Raj M. Shah                                    Philadelphia, PA Rachel G. Skerritt                            Roxbury, MA Brooke K. Stearns Lawson                Venice, CA Marc S. Sternberg                           New York, NY Maura C. Sullivan                            Palo Alto, CA Scott A. Suozzi                                Washington, DC Brian K. Surratt                               Seattle, WA Natasha Tarpley                             Chicago, IL Adam R. Taylor                              Washington, DC Presiliano R. Torrez                        Albuquerque, NM Christopher J. Voorhees                  Altadena, CA Chris E. Wallace                              Irving, TX Michael E. Webber                          Austin, TX Laura I. Weinbaum                          Philadelphia, PA Sonia A. Zeledon                             Washington, DC Wei Lily Zhou                                   Sparta, TN David E. Zipper                               Brooklyn, NY