 THE WHITE HOUSE Office of the Press Secretary  _______________________________________________________________  For Immediate Release                                 March 30, 2009     REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT ON THE AMERICAN AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY    Grand Foyer   11:07 A.M. EDT   THE PRESIDENT:  Good morning, everybody.   One of the challenges we've confronted from the beginning of this administration is what to do with the state of the struggling auto industry.  In recent months, my Auto Task Force has been reviewing requests by General Motors and Chrysler for additional government assistance, as well as plans developed by each of these companies to restructure, to modernize, and to make themselves more competitive.  Our evaluation is now complete.  But before I lay out what needs to be done going forward, I want to say a few words about where we are and what led us to this point.   It will come as no surprise that some Americans who have suffered most during this recession have been those in the auto industry and those working for companies that support it.  Over the past year, our auto industry has shed over 400,000 jobs, not only at plants that produce cars, but at the businesses that produce the parts that go into them and the dealers that sell and repair them.  More than one in 10 Michigan residents is out of work -- the most of any state.  And towns and cities across the great Midwest have watched unemployment climb higher than it’s been in decades.   The pain being felt in places that rely on our auto industry is not the fault of our workers; they labor tirelessly and desperately want to see their companies succeed.  It's not the fault of all the families and communities that supported manufacturing plants throughout the generations.  Rather, it's a failure of leadership -- from Washington to Detroit -- that led our auto companies to this point.   Year after year, decade after decade, we've seen problems papered over and tough choices kicked down the road, even as foreign competitors outpaced us.  Well, we've reached the end of that road.  And we, as a nation, cannot afford to shirk responsibility any longer.  Now is the time to confront our problems head-on and do what’s necessary to solve them.   We cannot, and must not, and we will not let our auto industry simply vanish.  This industry is like no other -- it's an emblem of the American spirit; a once and future symbol of America’s success.  It's what helped build the middle class and sustained it throughout the 20th century.  It's a source of deep pride for the generations of American workers whose hard work and imagination led to some of the finest cars the world has ever known.  It's a pillar of our economy that has held up the dreams of millions of our people.  And we cannot continue to excuse poor decisions.  We cannot make the survival of our auto industry dependent on an unending flow of taxpayer dollars.  These companies -- and this industry -- must ultimately stand on their own, not as wards of the state.   And that's why the federal government provided General Motors and Chrysler with emergency loans to prevent their sudden collapse at the end of last year -- only on the condition that they would develop plans to restructure.  In keeping with that agreement, each company has submitted a plan to restructure.  But after careful analysis, we've determined that neither goes far enough to warrant the substantial new investments that these companies are requesting.   And so today I'm announcing that my administration will offer GM and Chrysler a limited additional period of time to work with creditors, unions, and other stakeholders to fundamentally restructure in a way that would justify an investment of additional taxpayer dollars.  During this period they must produce plans that would give the American people confidence in their long-term prospects for success.   Now, what we're asking for is difficult.  It will require hard choices by companies.  It will require unions and workers who have already made extraordinarily painful concessions to do more.  It'll require creditors to recognize that they can't hold out for the prospect of endless government bailouts.  It'll have to -- it will require efforts from a whole host of other stakeholders, including dealers and suppliers.  Only then can we ask American taxpayers who have already put up so much of their hard-earned money to once more invest in a revitalized auto industry.   But I'm confident that if each are willing to do their part, if all of us are doing our part, then this restructuring, as painful as it will be in the short term, will mark not an end, but a new beginning for a great American industry -- an auto industry that is once more out-competing the world; a 21st century auto industry that is creating new jobs, unleashing new prosperity, and manufacturing the fuel-efficient cars and trucks that will carry us towards an energy-independent future.  I am absolutely committed to working with Congress and the auto companies to meet one goal:  The United States of America will lead the world in building the next generation of clean cars.   And no one can deny that our auto industry has made meaningful progress in recent years -- and this doesn't get talked about often enough.  Some of the cars made by American workers right now are outperforming the best cars made abroad.  In 2008, the North American Car of the Year was a GM.  This year, Buick tied for first place as the most reliable car in the world.  Our companies are investing in breakthrough technologies that hold the promise of new vehicles that will help America end its addiction to foreign oil.   But our auto industry is not moving in the right direction fast enough to succeed in a very tough environment.  So let me discuss what measures need to be taken by each of the auto companies requesting taxpayer assistance, and I'll start with General Motors.   GM has made a good faith effort to restructure over the past several months -- but the plan that they've put forward is, in its current form, not strong enough.  However, after broad consultation with a range of industry experts and financial advisors, I'm absolutely confident that GM can rise again, providing that it undergoes a fundamental restructuring.  As an initial step, GM is announcing today that Rick Wagoner is stepping aside as Chairman and CEO.  This is not meant as a condemnation of Mr. Wagoner, who's devoted his life to this company and has had a distinguished career; rather, it's a recognition that will take new vision and new direction to create the GM of the future.   In this context, my administration will offer General Motors adequate working capital over the next 60 days.  And during this time, my team will be working closely with GM to produce a better business plan.  They must ask themselves:  Have they consolidated enough unprofitable brands?  Have they cleaned up their balance sheets, or are they still saddled with so much debt that they can’t make future investments?  Above all, have they created a credible model for how not only to survive, but to succeed in this competitive global market?   Let me be clear:  The United States government has no interest in running GM.  We have no intention of running GM.  What we are interested in is giving GM an opportunity to finally make those much-needed changes that will let them emerge from this crisis a stronger and more competitive company.   The situation at Chrysler is more challenging.  It's with deep reluctance but also a clear-eyed recognition of the facts that we've determined, after careful review, that Chrysler needs a partner to remain viable.  Recently, Chrysler reached out and found what could be a potential partner -- the international car company Fiat, where the current management team has executed an impressive turnaround.  Fiat is prepared to transfer its cutting-edge technology to Chrysler and, after working closely with my team, has committed to build -- building new fuel-efficient cars and engines right here in the United States.  We've also secured an agreement that will ensure that Chrysler repays taxpayers for any new investments that are made before Fiat is allowed to take a majority ownership stake in Chrysler.   Still, such a deal would require an additional investment of taxpayer dollars, and there are a number of hurdles that must be overcome to make it work.  I'm committed to doing all I can to see if a deal can be struck in a way that upholds the interests of American taxpayers.  And that's why we'll give Chrysler and Fiat 30 days to overcome these hurdles and reach a final agreement -- and we will provide Chrysler with adequate capital to continue operating during that time.  If they are able to come to a sound agreement that protects American taxpayers, we will consider lending up to $6 billion to help their plan succeed.  But if they and their stakeholders are unable to reach such an agreement, and in the absence of any other viable partnership, we will not be able to justify investing additional tax dollars to keep Chrysler in business.   Now, while Chrysler and GM are very different companies with very different paths forward, both need a fresh start to implement the restructuring plan they develop.  That may mean using our bankruptcy code as a mechanism to help them restructure quickly and emerge stronger.  Now, I want everybody to be clear about this.  I know that when people hear the word "bankruptcy" it can be unsettling, so let me explain exactly what I mean.  What I'm talking about is using our existing legal structure as a tool that, with the backing of the U.S. government, can make it easier for General Motors and Chrysler to quickly clear away old debts that are weighing them down so that they can get back on their feet and onto a path to success; a tool that we can use, even as workers staying on the job building cars that are being sold.   What I'm not talking about is a process where a company is simply broken up, sold off, and no longer exists.  We're not talking about that.  And what I'm not talking about is a company that's stuck in court for years, unable to get out.   So it's my hope that the steps I'm announcing today will have a salutary effect -- will go a long way forward towards answering many of the questions that people have about the future of GM and Chrysler.   But just in case there's still nagging doubts, let me say it as plainly as I can:  If you buy a car from Chrysler or General Motors, you will be able to get your car serviced and repaired, just like always.  Your warranty will be safe.  In fact, it will be safer than it's ever been, because starting today, the United States government will stand behind your warranty.   But we must also recognize that the difficulties facing this industry are due in no small part to the weaknesses in our economy as a whole.  And therefore, to support demand for auto sales during this period, I'm directing my team to take several steps.   First, we will ensure that Recovery Act funds to purchase government cars get out as quickly as possible and work through the budget process to accelerate other federal fleet purchases, as well.   Second, we'll accelerate our efforts through the Treasury Department's Consumer and Business Lending Initiative.  And we are working intensively with the auto finance companies to increase the flow of credit to both consumers and dealers.   Third, the IRS is launching a campaign to alert consumers of a new tax benefit for auto purchases made between February 16th and the end of this year -- if you buy a car anytime this year, you may be able to deduct the cost of any sales and excise taxes.  And this provision could save families hundreds of dollars and lead to as many as 100,000 new car sales.   Finally, several members of Congress have proposed an even more ambitious incentive program to increase car sales while modernizing our auto fleet.  And such fleet modernization programs, which provide a generous credit to consumers who turn in old, less fuel-efficient cars and purchase cleaner cars, have been successful in boosting auto sales in a number of European countries.  I want to work with Congress to identify parts of the Recovery Act that could be trimmed to fund such a program, and make it retroactive starting today.    Now, let there be no doubt, it will take an unprecedented effort on all our parts -- from the halls of Congress to the boardroom, from the union hall to the factory floor -- to see the auto industry through these difficult times.  And I want every American to know that the path I'm laying out today is our best chance to make sure that the cars of the future are built where they've always been built -- in Detroit and across the Midwest --  to make America's auto industry in the 21st century what it was in the 20th century -- unsurpassed around the world.  The path has been chosen after consulting with other governments that are facing this crisis.  We've worked closely with the government of Canada on GM and Chrysler, as both those companies have extensive operations there.  The Canadian government has indicated its support for our approach and will be announcing their specific commitments later today.   While the steps I'm taking will have an impact on all Americans, some of our fellow citizens will be affected more than others.  So I'd like to speak directly to all those men and women who work in the auto industry or live in countless communities that depend on it.  Many of you have been going through tough times for longer than you care to remember.  And I won't pretend that the tough times are over.  I can't promise you there isn't more difficulty to come.   But what I can promise you is this:  I will fight for you.  You're the reason I'm here today.  I got my start fighting for working families in the shadows of a shuttered steel plant.  I wake up every single day asking myself what can I do to give you and working people all across this country a fair shot at the American Dream.    When a community is struck by a natural disaster, the nation responds to put it back on its feet.  While the storm that has hit our auto towns is not a tornado or a hurricane, the damage is clear, and we must likewise respond.  And that's why today I'm designating a new Director of Recovery for Auto Communities and Workers to cut through the red tape and ensure that the full resources of our federal government are leveraged to assist the workers, communities, and regions that rely on our auto industry.  Edward Montgomery, a former Deputy Labor Secretary, has agreed to serve in this role.   And together with Labor Secretary Solis and my Auto Task Force, Ed will help provide support to auto workers and their families, and open up opportunity to manufacturing communities in Michigan and Ohio and Indiana and every other state that relies on the auto industry.   They will have a strong advocate in Ed.  He will direct a comprehensive effort that will help lift up the hardest-hit areas by using the unprecedented levels of funding available in our Recovery Act and throughout our government to create new manufacturing jobs and new businesses where they're needed most -- in your communities.  And he will also lead an effort to identify new initiatives we may need to help support your communities going forward.    These efforts, as essential as they are, are not going to make everything better overnight.  There are jobs that won't be saved.  There are plants that may not reopen.  There's little I can say that can subdue the anger or ease the frustration of all whose livelihoods hang in the balance because of failures that weren't theirs.   But there's something I want everybody to remember.  Remember that it is precisely in times like these -- in moments of trial and moments of hardship -- that Americans rediscover the ingenuity and resilience that makes us who we are; that made the auto industry what it once was and what it will be again; that sent those first mass-produced cars rolling off the assembly lines; that built an arsenal of democracy that propelled America to victory in the Second World War; and that powered our economic prowess in the first American century.   Because I know that if we can tap into that same ingenuity and resilience right now, if we can carry one another through this difficult time and do what must be done, then we will look back and say that this was the moment when the American auto industry shed its old ways, marched into the future, remade itself, and once more became an engine of opportunity and prosperity not only in Detroit, not only in our Midwest, but all across America.   I'm confident we can make that happen, but we've got a lot of work to do.  Thank you.  Thank you, everybody.   END                    11:25 A.M  Additional materials regarding today's announcement:  Warrantee Commitment Program Chrysler Viability Assessment GM Viability Assessment Fact Sheet of GM and Chrysler   
THE WHITE HOUSE

Office of the Press Secretary
____________________________________________________________________________
For Immediate Release                                                         March 30, 2009

REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT
AT SIGNING OF
THE OMNIBUS PUBLIC LANDS MANAGEMENT ACT OF 2009
East Room
3:11 P.M. EDT

THE PRESIDENT:  Well, thank you so much, Ken, for that extraordinary introduction and for the work that you and your team are undertaking at the Department of the Interior.  We’re going to add a little bit to your plate today as a consequence of this extraordinary piece of legislation.

I want to thank all the members of the legislature who helped to craft this.  Many of them are on the stage here today. Obviously I've got to single out the Speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, for her extraordinary leadership, but also our Leader in the Senate, Harry Reid, who worked so diligently on this bill and made sure that it got done.  And so please give all of these legislators a big round of applause.  (Applause.)

If you'll indulge me, there are just a couple other people I want to acknowledge:  Nancy Sutley, who is the Chair of our Council on Environmental Quality, who is here.  Where's Nancy?  There she is, right in front.  (Applause.)  Jane Lubchenco, who is the Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.  Please, Jane -- (applause.)  A couple of great friends from Indian Nation -- President Joe Shirley of Navaho Nation, who is here.  Go ahead, Joe, stand up.  (Applause.)  And Tribal Chairman Robert Bear, of the Duck Valley Shoshone-Paiute Tribes.  Thank you so much.  (Applause.)

It is fitting that we meet on a day like this.  Winter’s hardships are slowly giving way to spring, and our thoughts naturally tend to turn to the outdoors.  We emerge from the shelter offered by home and work, and we look around and we're reminded that the most valuable things in this life are those things that we already possess.

As Americans, we possess few blessings greater than the vast and varied landscapes that stretch the breadth of our continent. Our lands have always provided great bounty -- food and shelter for the first Americans, for settlers and pioneers; the raw materials that grew our industry; the energy that powers our economy.

What these gifts require in return is our wise and responsible stewardship.  As our greatest conservationist President, Teddy Roosevelt, put it almost a century ago, "I recognize the right and duty of this generation to develop and use the natural resources of our land; but I do not recognize the right to waste them, or to rob, by wasteful use, the generations that come after us."

That's the spirit behind the bipartisan legislation I'm signing today -- legislation among the most important in decades to protect, preserve, and pass down our nation’s most treasured landscapes to future generations.

Many senators and congressmen here deserve enormous credit for making this bill possible.  I'm grateful to all their hard work.  As I mentioned before, Harry Reid made this a top priority.  He made sure this was the first bill the Senate passed this year.  This day would not be possible without his tireless dedication to protecting our treasured lands.

This legislation -- just to give you a sense of the scope -- this legislation guarantees that we will not take our forests, rivers, oceans, national parks, monuments, and wilderness areas for granted; but rather we will set them aside and guard their sanctity for everyone to share.  That's something all Americans can support.

And that’s why so much of this legislation, some of it decades in the making, has the backing of Americans from every walk of life and corner of this country.  Ranchers and fishermen, small business owners, environmentalists, conservative Republicans and liberal Democrats on the local, state and federal levels -- all united around the idea that there should be places that we must preserve; all doing the hard work of seeking common ground to protect the parks and other places that we cherish.

We’re talking about places like Colorado, where this bill will realize a vision 35 years in the making by protecting the wild back country of Rocky Mountain National Park, which attracts 3 million visitors a year.

Folks in communities around this park know they don’t have to choose between economic and environmental concerns; the tourism that drives their local economy depends on good stewardship of their local environment.  And year after year, these communities have worked together with members of Congress in an attempt to ensure that Rocky Mountain National Park will forever remain as breathtaking as it is today.

And that is what this bill does from coast to coast.  It protects treasured places from the Appalachians of Virginia and West Virginia to Michigan’s Upper Peninsula; from the canyons of Idaho to the sandstone cliffs of Utah; from the Sierra Nevadas in California to the Badlands of Oregon. 

It designates more than 2 million acres across nine states as wilderness; almost as much as was designated over the past eight years combined.

It creates thousands of miles of new scenic, historic, and recreational trails, cares for our historic battlefields, strengthens our National Park System.

It safeguards more than 1,000 miles of our rivers, protects watersheds and cleans up polluted groundwater, defends our oceans and Great Lakes, and will revitalize our fisheries, returning fish to rivers that have not seen them in decades.

And it wisely faces our future challenges with regard to water.  This bill assesses how growth and climate change will affect our access to water resources, especially in the West and Southwest, and it includes solutions to complex and long-simmering water disputes.  It’s hard to overstate the real and measurable impact this will have on people’s lives -- people like Frank Chee Willetto, a Navajo code talker in World War II, who's joined us today.  And because of this legislation, Frank, along with 80,000 others in the Navajo Nation, will have access to clean running water for the very first time.  That's something worth applauding.  (Applause.)  Thank you for your service.  (Applause.)

When coupled with the Recovery Act, which makes an historic $3 billion investment creating jobs that will restore and protect our landscapes and our ecosystems, preserve our national monuments, retrofit our facilities for energy efficiency and renewable energy-- taken together, today’s legislation takes another step toward fulfilling Teddy Roosevelt’s vision for this land that we love. 

It’s a vision that sees America’s great wilderness as a place where what was and what is and what will be -- all are the same; a place where memories are lived and relived; a place where Americans both young and young at heart can freely experience the spirit of adventure that has always been at the heart of the rugged character of America.

Now, the legislation I'm signing today also makes progress on another front for which many Americans have long waited.

The Christopher and Dana Reeve's Paralysis Act is the first piece of comprehensive legislation specifically aimed at addressing the challenges faced by Americans living with paralysis.  (Applause.)  Many folks and organizations from across the disability community worked hard to get this bill passed, and we are grateful to each of you for bringing us that much closer to providing all Americans with disabilities a full, fair and equal opportunity to achieve the American Dream.

This act creates new coordinated research activities through the National Institutes of Health that will connect the best minds and best practices from the best labs in the country, and focus their endeavors through collaborative scientific research into the cure for paralysis, saving effort, money, and, most importantly, time.

It promotes enhanced rehabilitation services for paralyzed Americans, helping develop better equipment and technology that will allow them to live full and independent lives free from unnecessary barriers.  And it will work to improve the quality of life for all those who live with paralysis, no matter what the cause.

That's the mission of the Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation.  In the lobby of their facility in New Jersey sits Christopher’s empty wheelchair.  And his son, Matthew Reeve, was once asked if the sight of it ever saddened him, and he replied no.  He said, "Empty chairs -- that was Dad's goal," he said.  "We hope there will be many more of them."

Matthew is here with us today.  And the legislation I'm about to sign makes solid progress toward the realization of that hope and the promise of a brighter future.

All in all, this legislation is that rare end product of what happens when Americans of all parties and places come together in common purpose to consider something more than the politics of the moment.  It's the very idea at the heart of this country: that each generation has a responsibility to secure this nation’s promise for the next.  And by signing this bill into law, that's what we're doing today.

So -- is Matthew here, by the way?  Matthew, come on up.  (Applause.)  Let's sign this bill.  (Applause.)
END
3:22 P.M. EDT
 
 


THE WHITE HOUSE

		Office of the Vice President
		________________________________________________________________________________________
		FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE                                                                   March 30, 2009

		 **Media Advisory**

Vice President and USDA Secretary Vilsack to Highlight Recovery Act’s Impact on Rural America

		Vice President and Secretary Vilsack to Focus on Rural Healthcare Clinics, Fire Stations and Funding for Housing

		Washington, DC – Vice President Joe Biden and Department of Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack will travel to North Carolina on Wednesday, April 1st to highlight how the Recovery Act is helping rural America. They will travel to Faison, North Carolina to visit the Goshen Medical Center, which is a rural area clinic receiving Recovery Act funds and serves Duplin, Eastern Sampson and Southern Wayne Counties.  They will then travel to Pikeville, North Carolina to visit the area’s Rural Fire Department’s main station, which is receiving Recovery Act funds to help build a new facility, because the current station cannot accommodate the necessary ladder trucks required to adequately and safely fight fires. The Vice President and Secretary Vilsack will also make a major announcement regarding rural housing funding. 

		Additional details on the trip and media logistics will be released soon. For questions, please email press@ovp.eop.gov.  

		###

