


THE WHITE HOUSE

			Office of the Vice President
		____________________________________________________________
		For Immediate Release                                    April 1, 2009


REMARKS BY THE VICE PRESIDENT
			ON HOW THE RECOVERY ACT IS HELPING RURAL AMERICA


		Goshen Medical Center
		Faison, North Carolina
		12:35 P.M. EDT

		THE VICE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. The Secretary of Agriculture and I have been friends, as you could probably tell, since the '80s. Tom was one of the finest governors in the United States of America. He, literally, has probably forgotten more about rural America than most people know. As the governor of Iowa -- and the commitment he made to economic development to these clinics in his own state -- all that he did before he was willing to come on and be the Secretary of Agriculture.

		So I am not being solicitous when I say the President and I are incredibly fortunate to have someone who, quite frankly, knows even more about this than both the President and I know. And that's what you try to do, hire on people who really know what they're talking about.

		I come from a state that is a rural state. Most people think Delaware and out west -- they think Delaware is the northeast. Well, it's part of the Delmarva Peninsula -- Delaware, Maryland, Virginia. Our largest industry, by far, is agriculture. It's not banking. It's not chemicals. It's not what people think. It's agriculture.

		And what Tom said about the values is absolutely -- absolutely clear. And so when I -- when we -- I asked Tom, I went to the Secretary, and I said: "Give me a place; what's one of the best examples that you can show, we could show, the world, the nation, as to why what we're doing in the stimulus package is worthwhile and that people are getting their bang for the buck, that it really makes a difference?"

		And he said -- he turned around and, Doc, he said, we should come and see you. (Laughter.) No, I'm serious, because you are helping create -- all of you are helping create a better reality for people in the eastern Carolinas here. You're creating a better reality for the people in this neighborhood. And I mean that in a broad sense.

		And it's great to see, firsthand, how together you all work. The fact that I think -- the press who has followed me may not fully appreciate what Dr. Bound said, that the money that is available from the federal government -- what we're going to talk about today -- he has gone out and leveraged, roughly 4 to 1, to do a whole lot of things that increase the well-being in this community. And everybody here -- as I've gone around to clinics -- seems to be acting with that sense of community.

		And speaking of sense of community, you don't have to look much further than down the road at Carthage. First, our deep condolences go out to the families of the victims of that nursing home shooting. But the damage could have been far worse for the entire town if it hadn't been for a young officer, a 25 year old policeman named Justin Garner, who displayed the courage and character that I think is reflective of the kind of courage and character so many people in rural America -- where people don't pay attention to -- actually display every single day for their communities.

		He showed how important it is that the men and women who make up the small towns in America are really part of the -- maybe the -- our national identity, they most reflect how we identify ourselves around the world.

		And really, first and foremost, we're here today for the purpose of trying to help everyone in this clinic, and everyone in this community, reclaim your vital role in our society. We're here to try to make rural America stronger, and this is just one of many examples across this great nation.

		We understand that the health of small towns like yours is essential for our nation's well-being, as well as it is to help big cities like Charlotte and other cities. It's essential -- it's essential -- that small towns, rural towns be healthy, and are growing, and have access to everything that is needed for the well-being of their citizens.

		And we understand that as we write a new chapter in our history as a nation, small town America will have to be one of its most prominent authors. Because what was said a little bit earlier -- I'm not sure who said it actually, but that this is a -- this health clinic, we think, and health clinics across America, these are the future. This is the model that I think you're going to see much more replicated than anything else.

		So it's not merely that, in my view, we're able to at a federal level help rural America and help rural health clinics, or health clinics generally, but it also, I think, is likely to serve as sort of a laboratory for how things can get done more efficiently, and how health care can be delivered more accurately, rapidly, without mistake, and with quality.

		And so we're not here just to see that rural America survives through this difficult recession we're in, but that it thrives as we come out of this recession. And I'm standing in a textbook example of just how to make that happen; how the America Recovery and Reinvestment Act is already serving families and creating more jobs is evidence -- is going to be evidenced right here in this clinic. You don't have to look any further than this clinic to see the recovery in action.

		With more than $635,000 in recovery funds -- and you can thank my colleagues behind me for that -- the center will be able to increase its staff, including two more doctors, and two more nurses who will now be able to serve nearly 5,000 additional patients, new patients beyond roughly the 41,000 -- is that right, 41,000 -- 45,000 that was served this past year; 1,500 of whom -- of these new patients will have no health insurance, and some 20 percent of them will be children.

		We know that health centers are the heart of these communities. They serve, as was mentioned by my colleague, 16 million patients across the country every year. And more than half of them -- more than half of them are in rural America, towns like Faison. And we know that health centers are, as I said, in the front lines of rebuilding a health care system most of us think is broken and needs some really serious repair. That's something the President and I are absolutely committed to, is reforming the health care system -- make it affordable and available to all Americans.

		And we know that these clinics' ability to serve American families will, in many ways, determine the ultimate success of the initiatives we're going to be pushing out the next four years. And we're committed to giving them what they need now to begin to turn communities around.

		In North Carolina alone, 27 community health care centers will receive more than $8.6 million in funds -- and they've either already received it, or are receiving it very shortly. In all, we have $2 billion targeted for health centers around the country helping serve some 17 million additional -- 17 million more patients, more than a third of whom are children.

		And we don't view that money as just spending to get us out of our troubles, but as a deep investment in strengthening the communities of the future. And these are, have to be, the communities of the future.

		The Goshen Medical Center is but one example of where we're investing. And investing in places like this all around the country, that demonstrate the vital role rural towns play in American life, is part of our objective here. All told, we'll deliver $20 billion in loans and grants to improve economic opportunity and quality of life in rural America this year, an additional $20 billion beyond the normal budget process.

		The money will go to improving broadband access, upgrading rural water and waste disposal systems, financing homes and rural families -- which Tom and I are going to be talking about a little later today a couple towns from here, and seeding new -- seeding new rural business ventures. And finally, as of today, American workers, some 95 percent of them this April 1st -- I know it's April Fool's Day, and I have nothing to fool you about -- (laughter) -- that will see an increase in their paychecks starting today -- 95 percent of Americans who collect a paycheck where they have withholding tax withheld from. Because the credit that is going to be made available, the typical American family will see $65 per month more in their paycheck. Now that's not the end of the world, but $65 makes a lot of difference in a lot of families. And it makes a difference. And it starts today.

		We recognize how important American workers are to our recovery, and we're acting boldly to make towns like Faison as strong as they possibly can be.

		Look, this -- folks -- and most of you know of my reputation for being fairly blunt -- but I'm going to level with you, that it's not secret that these times are tough. Throughout North Carolina, throughout my home state of Delaware -- Iowa, North Dakota was referenced earlier -- all across the country, times are really tough right now. And I get that. And every day I see communities like yours enduring the same struggles, asking the same questions of themselves and questions of their country.

		But every single day, every day as I travel across the country -- which I've tried to be out at least a couple days a week going around the country; I just got back from South America and Latin America -- but I try to be out as much as I can. Every single day I see something that proves and provides hope, hope that not only we're going to survive this current recession, but that the American people -- I mean real hardworking folks, families like yours -- will come out of this better off than they went into it.

		We will recover, folks. There's no question we'll recover. But it's not sufficient the economy just recovers. Barack and I said during our respective campaigns, and our joint campaign, that the measure of whether or not our administration is a success is not merely whether the economy is growing again, but whether the living standard of the middle class rises, and those aspiring to the middle-class have access. That will be the measure. The American people, working-class families, have to share in the increased productivity that's going to take us out of this recession. That's the measure.

		And so it seems to me -- as I said, I see all around everywhere I go, I see it here, that you all are in fact ready to join ranks and do everything that's needed to be done to see that that's happened. Because I tell you what, we feed -- when we come out -- we talk about it when we get back in the plane -- we feed off of your hope. We feed off of your optimism. The feedback we get from all of you is the thing that keeps this cycle going. Because ladies and gentlemen, without question, the American Dream needs to be brought back within reach of an awful lot of people whose grasp it has slipped from over the last eight, 10, 12 years.

		Every single American, whether in a big-city skyscraper or a small-town farmhouse: everyone is entitled to be able to pursue that dream. And we are committed -- we're committed to making that a reality again.

		This country's character, our backbone is defined by people in this community, and in my towns of Delaware -- like Dagsboro and Gumboro, and places like Maquoketa and other places in Iowa. I mean, this is -- this is how we're defined as a nation. And it's also primarily how we define ourselves. Even people in the cities define themselves in terms of rural America. It sounds a strange thing to say when we talk about these basic values.

		And so community centers like this, or cucumber fields and farms in the area -- I mean, this is who we are. And I -- many of you have been dealt out of that aspirational dream for too long. So, folks, our plan is to deal you back in. America needs its small towns to flourish as much as it needs its big cities to survive and flourish. So we're here today to begin the process of helping make that happen.

		Look, let me conclude by saying to I remember reading a great description of a North Carolinian from a writer who was touring North Carolina towns in the midst of the Great Depression. And he wrote a description of a typical North Carolinian facing uncertain times in the '30s. And here's what he wrote, and I quote: "He is now less proud of the distance he has gone than aware of the distance he must go. He knows that he has the greatest state on Earth and that he is as good as anybody in it. But he is by no means sure this is good enough."

		Well, folks, let me say to you we got a long distance to go. But I can assure you, unlike that observer in the 1930s, it is absolutely -- we are good enough. We are good enough, you and us, to make sure that the future is a lot better than the recent past. And in just the brief time I've been here, I can say with confidence that you have all around you, as a community, everyone here thinks we're plenty good enough to get ourselves out of this. And we're going to be able to do this in relatively short order, because you're more than good enough.

		So I can say that together with people like you, and with the help of the leadership of President Obama, in my view, and the Congress' support, we're going to turn this around. And I can say together I think we're going to begin to reshape the world.

		I apologize for being a little late getting out of the car -- as I was getting out of the car, the President called me from Europe, from the G20 meeting to discuss another matter. He said, "Joe, where are you?" (Laughter.) He wanted to know whether I was working, you know? (Laughter.) He said, "Joe, where are you? Where did I get you?" "Well," I said, "I'm in eastern North Carolina." He said, "We won there, didn't we?" (Laughter.) No, actually, that's not what he said. He said, "Tell everybody I said hello." And then he asked me in detail what I was doing. I said, "Mr. President, is that why you called?" He said, "No, no, no, no, I want to talk to you about something else. I want to talk to you about something else."

		So ladies and gentlemen, I think there's only one other subject I could talk to you about that may be of more interest to you, and that's the Tar Heels. (Laughter.) But I'm not going to do that, except to say I wish you all luck. And just if you get to Villanova, my wife's alma mater, just be easy, okay? (Laughter.)

		Anyway, thank you all so much. Doc, thank you. And by the way, speaking of Docs, come here Doc. (Laughter.)

		DR. BOUNDS: -- to look up to. (Laughter.)

		THE VICE PRESIDENT: This man has been practicing medicine for at least two or three years. (Laughter.) And I walked into one of the examining rooms, and he was there -- yes, and you've been here 17 years, right? I apologize, your first name?

		MS. AIDES: Lauren Aides (phonetic).

		THE VICE PRESIDENT: Lauren was in there with him. And there was a patient there. And I started to ask the Doc about what he needed here. And he said, what we need is we need some more personnel. We need a little -- it's kind of strapped now. We need a little more help, more docs, et cetera, more nurses -- which you're going to get with this.

		And I turned -- and I turned to the patient and I said, "Well, you know, Doc, she said 17 years." And I said, "He's been treating you right here in this place?" She said, "No, but other places." And she said, "And where he goes, I go." (Laughter.)

		Well, let me just say one thing to you all, because I think it's interesting. National studies show that people treated at health clinics, 85 percent of them have a personal relationship with someone they believe to be their family doctor. They know that person by name, and they have a relationship. When you ask that question generally, nationwide, only 35 percent of the American people can identify their doctor, and that they have a relationship with the doctor.

		So, Doc, as my mother would say, you're doing God's work, man. Thanks for everything. (Applause.)

		DR. BOUNDS: Thank you. for everything. (Applause.)

		END
		12:52 P.M. EDT



THE WHITE HOUSE

		Office of the Vice President
		__________________________________________________
		For Immediate Release                      April 1, 2009

REMARKS BY THE VICE PRESIDENT
		ON HOW THE RECOVERY ACT IS HELPING RURAL AMERICA
		 

		Pikeville Fire Department Main Station
		Pikeville, North Carolina
		2:16 P.M. EDT

		THE VICE PRESIDENT:  Ladies and gentlemen, let me -- first, Chief, let me start with you.  And thank you for letting me in your house.

		CHIEF WOOTEN:  You're welcome.

		THE VICE PRESIDENT:  I was telling the Chief, back in the other room, that this is a place, literally, a fire station like this I got -- my career got started.  Every aspect of my life has been touched by the fire service, and quite frankly, by the volunteer fire service -- all professionals.

		As we say -- used to say when I was a senator, could you excuse a point of personal privilege, Chief, and to all your members -- I, literally, not only owe my career, I owe my life.  I owe my physical life.  I owe the life of my two sons.  And I owe you a lot.  When I was -- first got elected, there was an accident affecting -- killing my wife and daughter, and my two sons were badly injured.  It was my volunteer fire department -- the Jaws of Life saved my two sons.  When I was diagnosed as having a couple cranial aneurysms where they didn't give me a real great chance of living, and they wanted to get me to a hospital in the snow storm at Walter Reed, from Delaware.  They asked how I wanted to get there.  And I said, literally, "Call my volunteer fire department."  And they got me there.

		When, a couple of years ago, lightning struck my home in the morning when I was down doing "Meet The Press" in Wilmington, Delaware, and the seven local departments -- not only one, seven of my buddies showed up.  And extensive damage.  They got my wife out of the house and everything worked fine.  So I really owe you guys, I genuinely do.  It's heart-felt, it's real.  And I don't think most people understand just how much you do, how much you contribute.

		You're the same guys and women who jump off the back of this apparatus after a fire in time to make sure to get to the Little League field so you can line the Little League field for the game.  You're the same folks that, you know -- so I know you know it, but this is community.  For me, the definition of community -- and my state is a rural state; little ol' Delaware, everybody thinks, is a northeastern state.  It's rural.  Our largest town is about 150,000 people, and the next largest town is around 30,000 people.  And we only have two paid fire services in our entire state.

		And so this is the place, at least where I come from, where you get married, you get buried.  This is the place, the physical spot in which all this stuff happens.  This is kind of -- in Georgetown, Delaware -- which is not my home, and places like -- that, this is the country club.  This serves as the social center, as well as protecting the safety and property of everyone.

		So I just want you to know that when I had a chance, when I asked Tom -- Governor Vilsack, now our Secretary of Agriculture has been a friend for a long time.  He actually, quite frankly, knows more about what we're able to do in this Recovery Act, particularly in concert with the Department of Agriculture and other agencies you work with, and anybody in our government.  And so I went to Tom, what, two weeks ago?  I said, "Tom, look, I think it's important we go out and we let people know how this money is being put to work for them, what we're actually doing.  Where should I go?  Where should I go?"

		And we were about 25 -- 45 minutes from here.  We went to a community health center first.  And then we said, I want to go to a fire station, because that's the best emblem of what it is we're doing to try to help communities fight through this recession, and at the same time, rebuild something, Governor, that's here to last.

		And Mr. Mayor, I'd be remiss if I didn't say thank you for the passport to get into town, we appreciate it very, very much.  I told the Governor -- I told the Mayor as I got of the car, a lovely lady next door to the fire station here waved a pamphlet to me and said she had to talk to me.  So I walked over and took out a pen -- I thought she wanted an autograph.  She said, "No, no, honey, I've signed it for you."  (Laughter.)  She did, swear to God.  She signed it for me because -- it's a long story, but it was about her husband.

		Anyway, so this is like home, man, this is coming home.  So I want to thank you and all the good citizens of Pikeville.  And Chief, you and your men and women here who, you know, as the Governor was pointing out back stage, you know, when you build this new fire station it all says the effect of, you know, people rate -- insurance companies rate how much they're going to charge for your insurance on your home.  Insurance goes down when you do good things like this.  People's payments to their -- on their mortgage to insure their home, goes down.

		I don't think people know, so -- but I'm not going to get into -- if I get off on volunteer fire service I'll spend the whole day here.  But, look, that old expression, "All men are created equal" -- and then a few became firemen.  You know, so you're not all created equal, you all are the best.

		Look, I don't have to tell folks in North Carolina, in this section of North Carolina about community.  I don't have to look any further than down the road at Carthage, where they just went through a tragedy -- all the families and the victims in the nursing home shooting.  But the damage could have been a whole lot worse but not for a local guy named Justin Garner -- a 25 year old policeman -- 25 year old policeman who displayed courage and character that we all need to get through these tough times.  And he showed us how important it is that the men and women who make up small towns serve their communities with dignity and valor, as well as help define our national identity.

		And so Tom wasn't exaggerating when he was saying that the President and I think this is more than just doing something about helping this recession.  It's about going to the places where the roots of where our values come from.  And it's -- folks, this is community.  And as I said, there's no better place to demonstrate it than right here in a fire hall in a small town.

		And so folks, we understand that the health of small towns like Pikeville is as essential to the nation's well-being as the health of big towns, like Charlotte.  We understand that as we write a new chapter in our history, the small towns of America and the fire fighters and teachers and farmers and police officers will have to be some of the most prominent of its authors as we rewrite this new contract we're trying to work out.

		And we understand that this administration -- you should understand we believe will not have done our job if after the recovery occurs -- and it will occur, we will recover; we will recover -- but that's not sufficient for us to recover in terms of our GDP and the growth of our economy.  We'll only be successful is when we recover if, in fact, the living standards of middle-class Americans have raised as we've moved out of this.  It's not sufficient just to recover.  We had a recovery in the housing bubble -- but guess what?  Middle class folks got left behind.  Productivity increased 20 percent, yet the average middle class family lost $2,000 over that eight year period -- instead of being part of it.

		So this is about more than just recovery.  It's about making sure that we build a firm foundation for the 21st century where the middle class is raised up and those aspiring to the middle class.  And, you know, I don't think we have to look any further than this fire house to understand what we mean by serving families and creating opportunities.  With $100,000 in recovery funds, this department is going to be able to build a new four-bay fire house, which may be able to house as many as eight vehicles, I'm told.

		And we know that the fire house serves an important purpose, but we also know that it's more than that.  It's an emblem of what, in fact, a community is about.  You all are committed to giving your community everything that they need -- those folks in this fire service.  And the communities appreciate it.  You keep our families safe and you display proudly the sacrifices and selflessness that make this community and thousands like it across the country strong.

		We don't view the money for the fire house as just spending to help us get out of the troubles we're in now -- oh, it will create jobs, it will put people to work, it will stimulate the economy in this small community, it will inject funds into the community.  We think that it is also an investment in the future.  And this is only one example how we're investing in all of you.  It's investing in Pikeville.

		We're doing much more, as the Governor indicated.  We're investing in places like this all across the country to demonstrate the vital role these towns of your size play in this recovery.  All told, we're going to deliver more than $20 billion -- $20 billion -- even in Washington, that's a lot of money -- $20 billion in loans and grants to improve economic opportunity and the quality of life in rural America; $20 billion set aside for rural America.  And the money is going to go to improving things which are not high on a lot of people's lists, but will make a big difference -- like improving broadband access so the farmer can sit there and get online and know exactly what his product is being sold for not just the next county over, but across the country.  And so your kids can be brought into the same kind of opportunity that kids all over the world are being brought into.

		We're also going to upgrade, as the Governor pointed out, rural water and waste disposal systems.  We know, Mr. Mayor, that's a big-ticket item for most small towns.  It's a gigantic item in terms of cost in dollars to get it done.  I don't need to tell you about it, Governor, because I'm sure you're implored with help in the state capitol for this all the time.

		And we're also seeding new rural business ventures.  I was, as I said, just down the road in Faison, discussing how we're investing in community health centers.  And, by the way, you got one of the best people in the country managing that operation down there.  And so we can continue to provide vital services so many vulnerable families need right now.

		I'm also happy to announce today the United States Department of Agriculture -- really Tom should be doing this announcement -- are going to be giving $10.4 billion in recovery funds for singe-family housing, $1.76 billion being released today.  Now, in the midst of this housing crisis, some of the people getting hit the hardest and the worst are people in rural America.  And we're doing this because we realize credit is so tight -- there are few options that exist for low-interest loans in rural America -- even creditworthy people are having trouble going to the bank and deciding they want to borrow the money to buy a home, or to refinance their home.  And today that changes.

		Of the $10.4 billion, $322 million, Governor, is headed to your state -- $322 million to invest in 875 loans, four of which are just right here in Wayne County.  And families, as of today, America workers are going to -- 95 percent of them, of all of those of you who have withholding held from your paycheck, everyone who is in that position is going to get -- it's not a lot of money, but it makes a difference in a lot of lives -- $65 a month more on average in your paycheck through the tax cut we put in -- not for the wealthy, but for working people -- $65 a month more in the paycheck.  In these hard times, $65 can make a difference to a lot of families that I know.

		And because of that credit, I think we're going to also have the effect of stimulating the economy.  All that money is going to go back in.  People are going to go to the drugstore.  They're going to go to the corner sandwich shop, the grocery store.  People are going to get the car repaired that they've been holding off on repairing for a long time.  That's the stuff that when the money goes into the economy and creates demand and people get hired; jobs are created as a consequence of that.

		All in all, we recognize how important America's workers are to our recovery, and we're acting boldly as we can to make towns like Pikeville as strong as possible.

		Look, folks, a lot of you know me, and I have a reputation -- and as the Governor knows -- for being pretty blunt and straightforward.  Well, I'm going to level with you.  To state the obvious, everybody knows these are really tough times.  They're tough times in North Carolina, they're tough times in Delaware, Iowa, California -- California has one of the highest unemployment rates in the nation right now.  We all get that.

		But every single day that I get out of Washington and am able to -- which I strive to do as often as I can -- every single day I get out in communities, it seems to me that you not only witness this enduring struggle, people asking questions about themselves, as well as they are about their country, and can we get through this -- but every single day, every single day I see something new that provides hope -- that provides hope -- hope that we're not only going to survive this recession, but that the American people -- and I mean working families like all of yours -- will come out of this better off than they did before.  I see it all around me, every place I go.  I see it here at the Pikeville Fire -- Volunteer Fire Department.  But I also see it in communities, including urban communities all across the country.

		The President and I really do feel the sense of urgency.  It's one thing to say, well, "tomorrow."  "Tomorrow" doesn't work for somebody who can't put food on the table.  "Tomorrow" doesn't work for somebody who in fact just lost their job.  "Tomorrow" doesn=t work for that mother or father who has to make that longest walk up the short flight of stairs to tell his son or daughter that, "Honey, I'm sorry, we just lost the house.  You can't stay here.  We're not going to be able to play in the same baseball team this spring.  You're not going to be able to do it."  I mean, "tomorrow" -- "tomorrow" is a hundred years away for people.

		And so that's why although we've been criticized, we felt so strongly that we had to be as robust as we possibly could in trying to keep unemployment from plummeting so that we create 3.5 to 4 million jobs, or save them, at the same time we begin to invest in communities to give people a little hope.

		Well, guess what?  I've observed that whether the people understand the detail of the Recovery Act or the detail of the budget, what they do have is they do have hope.  They do have hope.  And the funny thing is my job is supposed to come out and make people in our communities feel this sense of hope and optimism -- I'm the one that goes back -- I'm the one that goes back more filled with hope and optimism when I see all of you, how you face what's facing you right now and how you're ready to embrace change as long as you think there's a square deal; just let me in on the deal.  Just let me in on the deal.

		And so, folks, it's a real honor to be here with you.  It's an honor to be here.  Many of you in recent past have been dealt out of that American Dream a little bit.  Everybody, think about this.  You folks who are old enough to have children and young enough to maybe have your parents around.  Remember the days when your mother and father would tell you when you were a kid, you can be anything you want to be, you can do anything at all in this country as long as you work hard, believe in your country, and you're honest?  Well, there's not as many people today of the generation that our parents were, not raising kids, who look at their kids and say the same thing with the same conviction.

		Our parents said it and meant it.  My dad said it even after he lost his job.  My dad really believed it.  One is we got to do -- and this is part of this whole recovery -- is we build this up from the bottom up, not from the top down, is we got to make sure that there are tens of millions of parents all across the country, like our parents used to be, be able to look at their kid with confidence and just say, "Honey, it's going to be okay.  It's going to be okay."  That's what it's all about.  Because if you can't say that, mom, we let down a generation.

		And so I think we're ready.  I think this is the beginning of a new deal in terms of how people are dealt into the process.  I hope that's what it is.  And, you know, I was saying -- I said just a few hours ago that there was a great description of a North Carolinian written by a writer who was touring North Carolina towns during the Great Depression.  And he said of a typical North Carolinian facing uncertain times in the '30s, here's what he wrote, he said:  "He is now less proud of the distance he has gone than aware of the distance he has to go.  He knows that he's in the greatest state on Earth, and that he's as good as anybody in it.  But he is by no means sure this is good enough" to get him going.

		The difference between now and then -- I look in your eyes and I look in everybody else's eyes across this country -- and I do understand that in fact the pride of how far you've come is somewhat overshadowed by the distance you have to go right now.  But what I don't see -- what I don't see is what this writer saw in the eyes of a "North Carolinian" he was writing about.  I see the pride in your state.  But I also see the absolute certitude in your mind that if given a shot there is no reason why -- no reason why -- we can't come back stronger.

		And so folks, what we're all about today -- not only in building this -- priming the pump to be able to build this fire house -- and that's what it is, it's priming the pump, you all are doing a lot locally -- not only in this housing money and all the things -- some of the things I mentioned.  What it really is, is about getting a new start.  And so I -- this is kind of backwards, I know, but I want to thank you for giving me renewed confidence.  We're going to get this done.  We're going to get this done.  And with the grace of God, as my grandfather used to say, and the good will of the neighbors, and the crick not rising -- (laughter) -- we got a real shot, a real shot, and it starts right here, right here in this fire hall.  Right here in this fire hall.

		So, folks, keep the faith, and go Tar Heels -- unless they're playing Villanova.  (Laughter.) I got to tell you, I know it's politically incorrect to come to North Carolina and say you're for another team.  (Laughter.)  If Villanova is out of it this round, no problem, I'm for North Carolina.  If I had to bet, North Carolina wins, yes.  But I can't bet against Villanova for a simple reason:  I'll be sleeping alone.  (Laughter.)  My wife graduated from Villanova.  So you all are important, but I like sleeping with my wife.  (Laughter.)  And if she found out I showed up in North Carolina and said, "Go Heels," at the expense of her Villanova Wildcats, I'd be in real trouble.  (Laughter.)  So good luck, unless it is Villanova.  (Laughter.)

		Thank you all very, very much.  (Applause.)

		END
		2:37 P.M. EDT
		 







			VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN AND SECRETARY VILSACK HIGHLIGHT RECOVERY ACT’S HELP TO RURAL HEALTH CLINICS


		Faison, NC – Today, Vice President Biden and Department of Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack visited Faison, North Carolina to tour the Goshen Medical Center, which is a community health center receiving Recovery Act funds and serves Duplin, Eastern Sampson and Southern Wayne Counties. The Recovery Act has invested $2 billion for community health centers. So far, approximately $500 million is already out the door to health clinics across the nation to assist them in providing services to their communities. These centers serve a critical need for millions of Americans living in rural areas. Dr. Greg Bounds, CEO, Goshen Medical Center and Dr. Mary Wakefield, Administrator of Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) joined the Vice President and Secretary Vilsack.

		"Community health centers are at the heart of many of our rural communities," said Vice President Biden. "Sometimes, these clinics are the only health facilities for miles and miles. The Recovery Act’s investment is crucial meeting the health and medical needs of millions of Americans."

		"Without access to quality and affordable health care, many rural communities like this one, would have trouble surviving," said Secretary Vilsack. "This support is essential if we are going to fully realize the Obama-Biden Administration’s goal of rebuilding and revitalizing rural America."

		The Goshen Medical Center, a rural health clinic in Faison, NC is receiving $635,876 through the Recovery Act. The center will use this funding to increase the health center staffing which will result in 4800 new patients, 1500 with no health insurance. These funds will allow them to create 7 new health centers jobs, including two family medicine doctors, two nursing personnel, and three administrative staff. Twenty-seven community health centers across the state of North Carolina are receiving more than $8.6 million to provide primary health care for 41,228 more patients, including 26,889 who are uninsured. Health centers in North Carolina estimate that these new funds will allow them to create or retain a projected 154 jobs.

		In 2007, the Goshen Medical Center served a total of 40,457 patients. The health clinic addresses the needs of a diverse community: 41% of their patients are African American; 36% of patients are White/Caucasion; and 23% of the patients are Hispanic. A third of the clinic’s patients (33%) were uninsured, while 18% of their patients were covered by Medicaid and 16% of their patients were covered by Medicare. Sixty-seven percent of their patients have incomes at or below 200% of the Federal Poverty Line (33% have incomes at or below 100% FPL).

		Key Facts about Community Health Centers


			One of every 19 people living in the U.S. now relies on a HRSA-funded clinic for primary care.

			Nearly 1,100 health center grant recipients operate more than 7,000 community-based clinics in every state and territory, giving geographically isolated or economically distressed people access to preventive and primary health care.

			HRSA-supported health centers treated more than 16 million people in 2008.

			Nearly forty percent of patients treated have no health insurance and one-third are children

			Community Health Centers support over 105,000 jobs, including physicians, nurses, dentists, and other health professionals; leveraging over $9 billion in needed health services.


