See below for an answer to a question(marked with an asterisk) posed in the briefing that required follow up.
*To date we have billed BP and other responsible parties $222 million for response and cleanup activities. The next bill should be delivered next week and we will continue billing them until all the costs are covered.

12:42 P.M. EDT
     MR. GIBBS:  Wow, look at this, Sunday best, everybody in their new seats.  Church is full today, that’s good to see.  Ms. Ryan, you’re going to ask that gentlemen in front of you to sit down a little bit because he’s -- (laughter) -- he’s a little on the tall side, Ms. Ryan.  I’m just saying that it’s --
     Q    I’m vertically challenged.
     Q    She’ll put a phone book in her seat.
     Q    Oh, come on now.
     MR. GIBBS:  There’s a gizmo up here if you want to use that.
     Q    A booster seat?
     Q    Seriously.
     MR. GIBBS:  But seriously?  Is that -- are you trying to bring us down a little bit here? 
     Q    What’s the big deal about all this?
     MR. GIBBS:  Brother, you’re asking the wrong guy. 
Take us back to seriousness.
     Q    In the Gulf, obviously the static kill procedure, trying to move forward with that.  And I know you’ve said before that the President gets updated daily, I think.  I assume that’s still true, right?
     MR. GIBBS:  Yes, it is.
     Q    Is there anything special about now that they may be coming to the end of the leak -- anything special about how he’s getting updated, by whom?
 
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I know Secretary Chu and others are down in Houston today.  I think he will likely touch base with them at some point -- I don’t have the schedule in front of me -- but likely at some point today speak with Secretary Chu and others that are in Houston and are monitoring the activities.
     I think it is important to know the static kill, injecting the mud into the top of the well, is certainly one part of the long-term effort to finally kill the well.  That will be followed by activities at the bottom part of the well.  And then ultimately, as we’ve talked about, the permanent solution is still the relief well that is ongoing.
     Q    So you guys wouldn’t be sort of declaring victory on this until you get the relief well done?
     MR. GIBBS:  No, no.  Again, I still think that -- and the science -- the scientists believe that the long-term permanent solution is still ultimately the relief well.
     Look, I would touch on a few things over the past couple of days.  Obviously it’s always good news that since the sealing cap went on some weeks ago now, oil has not been flowing into the Gulf.  I would point out the release put out by EPA yesterday on toxicology tests, which are important, surrounding dispersants, and that -- and their findings, and their continued testing by EPA, NOAA and others to ensure that we’re monitoring that environment, all of which is tremendously important as we move forward.
     Q    Let me just switch topics quickly.  We had the Iraq speech yesterday, the first of several, I take it, planned on that topic.  We have a second round tomorrow on the developments in the auto industry.  What are some of the other topics that we should expect to see the President focusing on as success stories, good news, achievement kind of --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, let’s say that -- now that you mention those, let’s just touch a little bit on them.  I mean, obviously the President -- and I think many of you that covered the campaign, regardless of which campaign you covered -- without a doubt, I think it is safe to say that the President’s plan to remove our combat forces was among the most hotly debated in both the primary and in the general election.
     And I’ll be honest with you, I think if you look back at what was said over the course of many months both during the latter part of the general election, during the transition in the first part of the administration, I think many people believed that having -- changing the mission away from combat by August 31st, 2010, was likely not doable.  That we know now is on pace to happen.  Some 90,000 troops will be pulled out, along with 2 million pieces of equipment -- pulled out of Iraq by the end of this month.
     You mentioned the President visiting on Thursday the Ford facility outside of Chicago --
     Q    Thursday, not tomorrow -- getting ahead of myself, aren’t I?
 
     MR. GIBBS:  Right.  And, look, we’ve spent a lot of time on autos here both in the briefing room and certainly in the West Wing.  And I think we are still encouraged by what we see in a newly revitalized auto industry.  We’re getting auto sales figures today.  GM’s were out earlier and showed an increase in sales, not just from last month, but a more than 24 percent increase year to year, which I think also gives you a sense of making overall economic progress, because the discussions that we were having about the auto industry was in many ways predicated on an economic environment where you were selling -- going from a height of selling 17 to 17.5 million cars a year down to selling, during the height of our economic downturn, sales that approached 9 to 9.5 million.  Now we’re closer to -- on track for closer to 11 to 11.5 million, which means that the investments that the President and the team made in the auto industry and the hard work of the workers in those facilities has led to a strongly revitalized auto industry.
     Look, I think that the President will continue to talk about the steps that we took to revitalize the economy, the steps that have been taken to make us safer and more secure, all of which he’ll spend some time over the course of the next several months reminding people.
     Q    Are there are other sorts of achievement areas or specific achievements that he intends to kind of pluck out and talk about in a way that he has these as we get closer to November?
 
     MR. GIBBS:  Yes.  I mean, look, I don’t have the schedule in front of me, but I anticipate that we will spend, as I said, a bunch of our time over the course of the next several months or at least some of that time reminding people of where we’ve come from.  That will definitely be a big part of our fall.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    A couple questions.  On the international front, Israeli and Lebanese forces clashed on the border there, five dead.  What, if any, message does the President have for both sides?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, obviously it’s a -- it is an enormously tense region.  I think we have seen, over the course of the last several months, real progress in proximity talks and in building towards what we hope can soon be direct talks on a comprehensive peace.  And we hope that the conditions -- conditions certainly throughout the region don’t change that.
     Q    Is there any call for restraint on the part of the U.S.?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, obviously I think that is something that I’m sure you’ll hear out of the State Department today as well.  
     
     Q    And on the domestic front, Treasury Secretary Geithner was speaking today about Elizabeth Warren as a potential candidate for the Consumer Financial Protection Agency chief.  How much closer is the President to making a decision on that?  Will he do so before he goes off to Martha’s Vineyard for vacation?
     MR. GIBBS:  I don’t know whether he’ll make a decision on that before the 19th of August.  I do not expect anything this week on that topic.  I don’t think anything is imminent.
     Yes, ma’am.
     Q    Robert, two questions.  First of all, President Zardari told Le Monde today that “the international community to which Pakistan belongs is losing the war against the Taliban.  Above all, it is because we’ve lost the battle for hearts and minds.”  When a partner like that -- a supposed partner says something like that, what does that say about where we are in Afghanistan?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I don’t think the President would agree that -- with President Zardari’s conclusion that the war is lost.  I don’t -- again, I haven’t seen the interview.  I don’t know what he -- why he’s come to that conclusion.  But I think it is safe to say that the actions and the efforts that the coalition, international forces and American forces, have taken over the last several months have very much the hearts and minds of the Afghan people at the forefront.
     And I would say this.  The Afghan people know of the brutality of the Taliban, just as the Pakistani people, on the actions that their extremist counterparts were taking in Pakistan last year to move on the capital of Pakistan is why the country of Pakistan started to take more direct action against safe havens.
     So I think that the hearts and minds of those in Afghanistan and Pakistan are obviously a key part of our strategy, as well as the hearts -- what is in the hearts and the minds of the extremists that seek to do Afghans or Pakistanis harm.
     Q    Just to follow up?
     MR. GIBBS:  Let me go around.
     Q    I just wanted to ask something a little off topic, a little more fun.  The President’s birthday is tomorrow.
     MR. GIBBS:  It is.
     Q    Any special plans?
     MR. GIBBS:  Obviously we travel to Chicago later tomorrow afternoon.  We’ll probably have more information on this later, but I assume that -- I think his plans for tomorrow are dinner with some friends in Chicago.  And I think he is looking forward to spending the night in his house for a change.
     Q    He’s been referencing his age a lot lately.  He did it at the sub shop, talking about his slowing metabolism.  He did it yesterday, talking about his graying hair.  Does he feel like the weight of the presidency is perhaps accelerating his aging?
     MR. GIBBS:  I can’t imagine that the weight of the job doesn’t take a toll physically and mentally on anybody that does it.  But at the same time, I think he’s still -- I would say he’s still in pretty good shape and is having -- is enjoying the job even with its many challenges.  He knew what he was getting himself into in deciding several years ago to undertake this.
     There’s no doubt that it takes an enormous physical and mental strain on making the decisions that you make, on sending young men and women off to war or tackling the greatest economic calamity our country has faced since the Great Depression.  But I know he greatly enjoys it, and it will just require him to get more frequent haircuts.
     Yes, ma’am.
     Q    There’s a debate that’s taking --
     MR. GIBBS:  Likely I’m going to hear about that.  (Laughter.)
     Q    There’s a debate that’s taking place in New York City whether or not it’s appropriate to build a mosque, an Islamic cultural center, near the site of Ground Zero.  What is the administration’s position on this?
     MR. GIBBS:  Suzanne, I’ve been asked about this a couple times.  I think this is rightly a matter for New York City and the local community to decide.
     Q    The President takes a position on religious freedom, on tolerance.  Why wouldn’t the administration weigh in on this?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think we have -- I think you’ve heard this administration and the last administration talk about the fact that we are not at war with a religion but with an idea that has corrupted a religion.  But, that having been said, I’m not from here going to get involved in local decision-making like that.
     Q    Do you think the Anti-Defamation League has a correct point of view in saying, out of the sensitivity to some of the victims of 9/11, it’s not appropriate?
     MR. GIBBS:  Suzanne, again, I think it is a decision that is appropriately debated at the local level.
     Q    On another topic -- McCain, Coburn report that cites economic stimulus money they say has been mismanaged or wasted.  They cite 97 projects out of 70,000.  Do you believe that this is good news, bad news?  Is there some acknowledgment that some of those projects actually might not be well managed?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think there was an acknowledgment on their part, in pulling a couple of their projects out of their report that weren’t ultimately recovery projects.  I think this has, Suzanne, much more to do with politics.  I think maybe the best person for Senator McCain to debate on this would be the chief economic adviser of his own presidential campaign, who not only weighed in on the President’s recovery plan, but has in the last week written an analysis of what our economy would look like without the steps that we took.
     It’s a report that instead of 8 million jobs having been lost, that figure would be 16 million jobs.  So I think this is a -- look, every day, the Vice President and the Vice President’s staff work diligently to ensure that projects that receive funding abide by certain standards.  All of that is on the Internet -- a level of transparency not seen in government programs, particularly those of the magnitude of this.  And I would suggest that John McCain and his chief economic adviser during that campaign, I think the debate is probably better between the two of them.
     Q    Do you it’s a credible report?
     MR. GIBBS:  From what I’ve read, no.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    Following up on that, for those of us who covered the McCain campaign, I don’t think anybody thought Zandi was actually the chief economic adviser.  He was somebody who was consulted.  And Zandi has told me that he’s a registered Democrat.  So, I mean, isn’t it a little disingenuous to hold him out there as an example of Republican thinking?
     MR. GIBBS:  Because he’s a registered Democrat?
     Q    Well, they were reaching out to people who think differently.  He is not the person who formulated the McCain economic plan.  He’s not their chief economic adviser.
     MR. GIBBS:  Was he not a McCain -- okay, was it --
     Q    He was an outside adviser to the campaign --
     MR. GIBBS:  He was a key economic adviser?
     Q    No, he was somebody they consulted on economic issues.  But, I mean, to treat him as the guy who formulated the McCain economic plan I think is just not accurate.
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I -- apparently, according to you, Chip, he took part in a couple conference calls.  I don’t think either John McCain or Mark Zandi have portrayed their role quite as minimally as you have.  I would say --
     Q    But I’m just saying he was not the person who formulated the core of the McCain economic plan.
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, needless to say he was an active participant regardless of his party registration on the campaign of John McCain.  I don’t think we’re going to doubt that his support was for John McCain.  And John McCain has apparently come into a disagreement with a guy that played a prominent role in his presidential campaign. 
     Q    Hasn’t he also advised your administration?
     MR. GIBBS:  Pardon me?
     Q    Zandi -- hasn’t Zandi also advised this administration with the stimulus?
     MR. GIBBS:  They certainly have -- we talked to a whole host of economists.
     Q    Exactly, that’s how they described his role with the McCain campaign, that they talked to a whole host of economists.
     MR. GIBBS:  One of them being Mark Zandi.
     Q    Just as the White House -- he is one of the people you consult.
     MR. GIBBS:  We’re happy to list Mark as somebody who we’ve taken advice from.  We thought his advice was so right on the stimulus that we pursued an economic recovery plan that I think Mark’s own paper describes along with Alan Blinder, the former vice chair of the Fed, as having had a significant impact on ensuring that the depth of our recession didn’t reach a Great Depression.
     Q    Do you agree then with Mark Zandi, who said the tax cuts shouldn’t be allowed to expire in the middle of a recession?
     MR. GIBBS:  The President believes that we should not raise taxes on the middle class.
     Q    He says across the board.
 
     MR. GIBBS:  Right.  The President believes that adding $700 billion to our deficit for tax cuts for those making in excess of $250,000 a year doesn’t make sense.
     Q    So is Zandi wrong about that?
 
     Q    That includes businesses.
     MR. GIBBS:  We disagree with him on that.
     Q    And that includes businesses though, Robert, it’s not just individuals, right?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, understand that, again, this is the debate we had during the campaign in which we now know which way the participants line up.  The number -- you’ll hear this a lot during this debate -- “You’re going to raise taxes on” --
     Q    Small business.
     MR. GIBBS:  Right.  Just as we said during the campaign that about 2 percent of small businesses fall into that category.  So when you hear -- I mean, let’s be clear, this isn’t about small business, because if you were for cutting taxes on small business, would you be holding up a small business tax cut in the United States Senate right now?  Would you be holding up a bill that allows them to deduct more of their investment in equipment if you were supportive of small business?  Would you be holding up a bill that eliminates capital gains for small business?  Well, no, right, because you’re for small business, except when you’re not for small business.
     I would say I think they use the moniker of small business when it fits their political lens.  But in reality, this isn’t something that is going to impact on 98 percent of small businesses.  It’s not going to hit a majority of families in this country.  The President believes we ought to protect those in the middle class.
     Q    Changing topics.  The President is hitting the campaign trail.  Has the White House heard -- there have been these reports recently that the White House has heard from various Democrats that they prefer the President not come to their districts and campaign for them.  Has the White House heard from people who have suggested that?  And if so, why do you think that is and will the President honor their request?
     MR. GIBBS:  Chip, we’ll help people where they think we can help them the most.  I think that’s largely been -- that’s been how it was when the President campaigned for Democrats as a senator, when he was running for the Senate in 2004, and I think how most White Houses deal with political requests that come in.
     Q    But in 2006 and 2008, just about everybody wanted him to come to their districts and now there seem to be a lot of people who don’t.  Why do you think that is?
     MR. GIBBS:  I don’t necessarily believe that in 2006 -- I think if you look in 2006 and 2008, we stayed in a certain number of states.  I don’t -- we never said we were going to all 50 states.
     Look, Chip, again, I think it’s a fairly well worn adage that we will go to places where candidates think that that’s helpful.  We will raise money for places -- in places where candidates and committees think that that’s helpful.  We’ll be in mail, we’ll be in --
     Q    Will you stay away from places if it’s not helpful?
 
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, of course.  Absolutely.  No, we’re not going to go to places where people think it’s unhelpful that we go.  That would be crazy.  (Laughter.)  I mean, I -- breaking news alert, but, you know --
     Q    Are there are a lot of those places, you think?  (Laughter.)
     MR. GIBBS:  I don’t think so.  I don’t --
     Q    Can you name them?
     Q    Which districts?
     Q    Could you name those places? 
     Q    Could you get back to us with a list?
     MR. GIBBS:  Yes, I think I’ve broken new ground here.  We will not go places where candidates think it is unhelpful for us to go.  Story and film at 11:00.  (Laughter.)
     Q    On the Gulf, in the Oval Office address, the President talked about a Gulf restoration plan eventually that BP would pay for.  Where are we on that?  Is there going to be an announcement of that at some point? 
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I would say this --
     Q    And what kind of money are we talking about?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I would say -- I don’t think we’ve reached that point yet.  There are a series of -- there will be a series of fines.  There will be a fine that the government requires BP to pay that will be based off of the amount of pollution put into the Gulf, which I think by any accord will be a substantial fine.
     In addition to that -- and I can check on where the exact process is -- natural resources damage assessments will be made -- BP is liable for the damage that it’s caused to the environment above -- that’s different than a penalty for the pollution that’s been emitted.
     Secretary Mabus is working through the process of Gulf Coast restoration.  And we expect I think his report to the President sometime the latter part of September.
     Q    And are we talking about a fund of billions of dollars that BP will be --
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think maybe --
     Q    -- paying into this?
     MR. GIBBS:  I think that the penalty on the oil emitted, if I’m not mistaken, that is a penalty that goes to the Treasury.  The natural -- the damage assessment, I think will, be without having a lot of backing on this directly in front of me, I think will be a substantial penalty based on the damage that the pollution has caused.
     Q    And the last question.  Is the President upset at all that his family is not going to be with him on his birthday?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, you get a long answer about -- I think it’s safe to say that of course he will miss them.  He has a daughter at camp that I know he’s already talked to a couple of us that obviously he dearly misses.  But they’ll be all back together soon.
     Q    Has he called camp?
     MR. GIBBS:  I’m not going to get into that.
     Wendell, welcome to the front row.
     Q    Thank you.
     Q    Can we get a readout of that?  (Laughter.)
     Q    If I can follow on Jennifer -- if I can follow on Jennifer’s question, in Secretary Geithner’s op-ed, “Welcome to the Recovery,” he cites a number of statistics, including the auto industry recovery and increased savings rates.  And I wonder if the President believes there is enough good economic news to get people past the 9.5 percent unemployment rate?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, I think before and after Secretary Geithner’s op-ed, I don’t think Secretary Geithner in his own op-ed believes that 9.5 percent unemployment doesn’t present serious challenges.  And I don’t think anybody -- the President and the Secretary included -- believe that despite the progress that we made in where we were and where we’ve come to, I don’t think anybody is satisfied that we’re -- that we’ve made enough or that we’re out of the woods. 
     We’ll get jobs numbers at the end of the week.  I will stipulate, as I have many months in a row, that I don’t see those numbers before they’re announced.  I don’t know what this week’s -- or this month’s numbers will show.  But our hope is that we will build off of positive private sector job growth heading into the seventh month in a row as a positive sign.
     Is the economy adding jobs fast enough or as fast as we would like to see it?  No, of course not.  I think one of the things that would be a good antidote to where we are is the Senate passing a small business bill that would spur investment by small businesses and provide them the credit they need to expand and hire.
     Q    Given the economic difficulties, pollsters Pat Caddell and Doug Schoen say the tone of the President’s comments, especially in political circumstances recently, seems to have abandoned the politics of hope to be appealing more to the Democrats’ base.  Are they --
     MR. GIBBS:  How so?
     Q    More negative.  For example, yesterday at the DNC fundraiser, talking about, as he has in the past, whether or not we should give the keys to the Republicans and put the car in reverse or drive.  One, has he abandoned the politics of hope, at least for the midterm elections?  And two, does R and D stand for reverse and drive, or Republican and Democrat?
     MR. GIBBS:  Both.  An analogy he used during the campaign in which I think we were criticized as being too much about hope.  I don’t -- I can’t divine what Pat Caddell and Doug Schoen -- what their agenda is.  I will say this, Wendell.  The President believes that there is a choice that will be made, and it is exemplified in the analogy that he uses -- are we going to go backwards to the type of policies that led us to the greatest economic calamity that most of us have ever known, or are we going to continue to make progress and go forward?
     Understand the agenda of those on Capitol Hill.  Let’s take, for instance, the last piece of -- the last piece of reform that the President put into place was financial reform, new rules for the way Wall Street and banks operate.  The Republican plan for that:  repeal it.  That seems like a fine thing to debate come this fall.
     Q    Is he concerned that he might turn off independent voters?
     MR. GIBBS:  No, I think independent voters want rules in the road for -- new rules in the road for --
     Q    Looking at the poll, not just talking about this specific legislation.
 
     MR. GIBBS:  Look, I think if you look at the tone of the President’s remarks in the auto factories in Detroit and Hamtramck on Friday, I think the President -- the President said don’t bet against the American worker.  I think that’s the tone that he’ll have a lot during the fall.
     
     Any interesting emails, Ms. Guthrie?  (Laughter.)
     Q    Oh, sorry.  (Laughter.)  Gosh, that was embarrassing.  On taxes --
     MR. GIBBS:  I didn’t ask you to read them, I just -- (laughter.)
 
     Q    You might want to.
     MR. GIBBS:  Bill, stop emailing Savannah.  (Laughter.)
     Q    It’s from my boss.  On letting the Bush tax cuts expire, given the continuing economic difficulties, would the administration be open to a compromise position of having the Bush tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans be phased out over time?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, our viewpoint is that for the wealthiest Americans -- I don’t think the wealthiest among us have -- well, they certainly haven’t felt the type of economic downturn that the middle class not only experienced during that economic downturn, but in the years that led up to it.  And, again, as we’ve said, adding those tax cuts on, continuing those tax cuts, likely adds another $700 billion to our debt. 
     
     Q    So no room on compromise, on letting them expire at the end of this year?
 
     MR. GIBBS:  I think the President -- the President’s viewpoint is protect our middle class -- protect the middle-class tax cuts and let those for the wealthy expire.
     Q    On the judge’s decision yesterday in the Virginia lawsuit -- I know it’s procedural in nature, but he did say that one of the strongest claims the government made in defense of that health care individual mandate was that it derived from the government’s power to tax.  By pressing a legal argument in court that that individual mandate is a tax, is the administration acknowledging it’s basically passed a tax on everybody and would violate your pledge not to tax the middle class?
     MR. GIBBS:  No.  Again, I’d go back to something like the car insurance example.  I think we all pay a tax when all of us don’t have health care, right?  We pay a tax in your health care premiums, because instead of having health care that pays for the bills if you’re in an auto accident, if you don’t have insurance you go to the emergency room and the rest of us pay it.
     The President believed -- and this was not a position he originally took in the campaign, but believed that if we’re going to bring down health care costs, you have to have everybody in the system.
     Q    But you’re acknowledging it’s a tax?
     MR. GIBBS:  Again, I think that the President believed that if we’re going to have the type of savings that we need, if we’re going to have the type of benefits we all know can come from health care, everybody has to be in the system.
     Q    Is it a violation of the pledge not to raise taxes on the middle class?
     MR. GIBBS:  No.
     Q    How come?
     MR. GIBBS:  Again, I think the President has spoken pretty clearly to the reasons for making sure that each of us has coverage.
     Q    Okay, one last thing real quick.  Just to get it on the record, the First Lady’s trip to Spain with Sasha, what portion of that is paid by taxpayers and what portion by --
     MR. GIBBS:  I would point you over to the First Lady’s office.  It’s a private trip and is being paid for that way.
     Q    The President tomorrow meets with the AFL-CIO.  Is he going to reassure them that trade pacts -- excuse me, free trade agreements with Korea and other countries have strict labor rules in place to protect American workers?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, the President believes that we ought to have rules in place that make sure that trade works for everybody here in America.  That’s why the President has pledged before going to Korea in the fall that we’d present an agreement that made sense for the auto industry, made sense for the beef industry, and not just simply passing along a free trade agreement that existed before.  The President believes that -- and I think if you look at either the GDP numbers or any reasonable economic growth plan for the future, it involves having to increase our exports.
     Here’s a good example, and it’s sort of in the realm of some of the concerns that were had about the free trade agreement under the Bush administration were about autos.  And, look, because of help that Ford is getting from the Department of Energy, the factory the President will visit outside of Chicago got money to help retool.  That retooling allows the new Ford Explorer not to be built on a truck frame but to be built on a car frame, which means the car itself is more fuel efficient, and that is a gateway for -- and Ford’s business plan calls for specifically marketing this car not just in this country but overseas.  That helps -- they just added 1,200 jobs, by the way, at that facility, so that helps put people to work; that helps grow our economy; that helps with our trade deficit and our increase in exports.
     Q    Will he make any new assurances of things that he wants to see?
     MR. GIBBS:  I have not seen the draft of the speech in total yet.  I think the President will talk about the economic decisions that we have made and where we go -- where we’re going forward.
     Peter.
     Q    Robert, following up on a couple questions you took earlier about the Gulf situation, what kind of reassurance can the administration offer to people who live there who are worried that once you do have the ultimate solution with the relief well that the government and BP are not going to be there for the long haul on the environmental cleanup?
     MR. GIBBS:  It’s a very good question, and, look, I think if you go back to the answers that I gave around BP’s decision to change CEOs, I think certainly Thad Allen, Carol Browner and others have at every opportunity taken the chance to both tell BP they can’t leave, and reassuring people that we’re in the Gulf for the long haul.
     Capping the well, though for the past 100 or so days has been our most immediate project, that does not, as you say, that does not allow us to, and this government will not, walk away from the obligations to continue protecting the coastline, continue cleaning up the damage that has been done, billing BP for that damage, as we talked about in both the cleanup activities themselves as well as the damage assessments that will be made about that damage, and continuing to work to implement the escrow fund that will pay for not just the environmental but then the economic damages caused by the spill in that region.
     I think that we would all agree, we do all agree, that what has happened requires our continued focus long past capping that well and our commitment is to continue to do so.
     Q    Is there any initial dollar estimate or time estimate on the cleanup?  How much it’s going to cost and how long it’s going to take?
     MR. GIBBS:  Let me see if they have -- without me sort of guessing on this, let me see what type of updated figures.  I assume partly, too, what I said earlier in the question where I answered about Secretary Mabus, I think some of that will likely also come in his report again to the President later in September.*
     Yes, ma’am.
     Q    Senator McConnell said in an interview today that the President’s immigration lawsuit against Arizona was a “blatant political move to help his reelection.”  He said it was more about helping the President get reelected in 2012 than helping the Democrats in 2010.  Do you have any reaction to that?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I think later in the interview -- didn’t later in the interview then he surmise that we ought to take a look at the 14th Amendment?  So I guess -- I don’t know if that was based on 2010 or 2012, but my hunch is it’s based purely on politics. 
     The President and the Justice Department were concerned about the law creating a patchwork of environmental -- I’m sorry -- of immigration policies.  The case that we made to the court in Arizona was just that, and the court ruled indeed that Arizona and other states can’t and shouldn’t create a patchwork of immigration laws throughout the country.  So it wasn’t an argument that was based on anything other than a legal argument, and honestly a legal argument that the Justice Department prove to a judge.
     Q    So the idea that this will have a long-term benefit for Democrats --
     MR. GIBBS:  I will say -- I’ve said this before, I’ll say this again -- it builds off of Chip’s political question.  The President has made a lot of decisions in this White House.  I think if you were to -- I think if you look at the polling on the particular decision, the numbers aren’t exactly with us, right?  If we were making decisions based on politics, or on polling, we’d get a new pollster.  I don’t think -- no, the DNC has a pollster.  We wouldn’t -- those decisions are made on what’s best for the country, not on politics.
     Q    He also said that Elizabeth Warren would be a very controversial nominee to the Consumer Protection Agency.  Do you have any comment on that?
     MR. GIBBS:  Based on what?
     Q    That’s what he said during the interview. 
     MR. GIBBS:  I don’t know what he bases -- it would be interesting to know what he based his comments on.
     Q    A lot of people have said that she could be a controversial pick.
     MR. GIBBS:  Based on?
     Q    I mean, Senator Dodd has said that she might not get enough votes to be --
     MR. GIBBS:  Based on?
     Q    Okay, the AFL-CIO event, can I just ask one thing -- is it at the White House tomorrow?
     MR. GIBBS:  I believe it’s at the Convention Center, yes.
     Q    And why is the President meeting with them?  Do you have any background on the meeting tomorrow?
     MR. GIBBS:  We can get it.  It hasn’t been put out yet.  But we’ll send it out.  I mean, look, I think working men and women are an important part of this country.  And the President looks forward to speaking tomorrow with the executive council as he’s done on a number of occasions.
     Ari.
     Q    Human rights lawyers are challenging the administration’s assertion that an American citizen can be targeted for killing overseas.  Should Americans worry that if they go overseas, their own government could target them to be killed?  Anwar al-Awlaki is the person in question, but the legal principle --
     MR. GIBBS:  Okay, let’s -- let me just for the point of -- I don’t know what I would make -- I think you just largely said a tourist going overseas and Anwar al-Awlaki are somehow analogous in nature.  I’m not a --
     Q    But if the U.S. decides that an American citizen is affiliated with a terrorist group --
     MR. GIBBS:  No, no, let’s be clear, let’s be -- no, no, let’s be clear.
     Q    Is there any legal process?
     MR. GIBBS:  Let’s be clear about Anwar al-Awlaki, okay?  The United States hasn’t decided that Anwar al-Awlaki is aligned with a terrorist group.  Anwar al-Awlaki has in videos cast his lot with al Qaeda and its extremist allies.  Anwar al-Awlaki is acting as a regional commander for al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.  So let’s not take a tourist that might visit Italy overseas and equate him to somebody who has on countless times in video pledged to uphold and support the violent and murderous theories of al Qaeda.  There --
     Q    The U.S. has mistakenly identified people as terrorists in many instances in the last eight years, and if Americans can be targeted for killing --
     MR. GIBBS:  Ari, it’s hard to imagine an issue in which two things have been conflated more than your question in the past 18 months of me taking questions here.  I think the notion that somehow anybody in this country confuses traveling overseas and the role that Anwar al-Awlaki has in inciting violence -- they’re not even in the same ballpark.
     Q    Are you acknowledging that Awlaki is on the assassination list, then?
     MR. GIBBS:  I just answered his question about comparing Joe the Tourist to Anwar al-Awlaki.
     Q    Just a quick follow to that.  U.S. citizens are entitled to a certain judicial process when it comes to questions like this, when it comes to sentencing to death.  And is there a process in place that we don’t know about?
     MR. GIBBS:  There’s a process in place that I’m not at liberty to discuss.
     Q    Thank you.  Returning to the tension in the Middle East, if it begins an all-out war involving Hamas, Hezbollah and Iran, the countries around -- would the U.S. come to Israel’s defense militarily?
     MR. GIBBS:  It’s hypothetical day here at the White House.  I’m, Connie, not going to obviously get into discussing what if there was an all-out war in the Middle East.  Obviously the President has since the moment he walked into the Oval Office taken steps to pull us back from those type of tensions.  I have on countless times stated our long-held, countrywide position of protecting the security of Israel and its people, and the White House and this country will continue to do so. 
     Q    And anything new from Iran -- on the three hostages in Iran?
 
     MR. GIBBS:  Nothing new.  Obviously it’s been -- Friday and Saturday represented a year of them being wrongly held by the Iranian government.  And the President on Friday called for and continues to call for the release of three people that are wrongly held.
     Q    Thanks, Robert, two questions.  One, the President has been trying his best to bring those who do not support the U.S. on terrorism and also who does harbor and finance terrorists in the Afghanistan region.  Does the President now believe Pakistani intelligence, Pakistani military, and Pakistani civilian governments, that they will not -- they will support the U.S. from now on?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, I will give you largely what I gave last week on this, and that is I think if you look at the progress that we have made with Pakistan on safe havens, on confronting terrorists, I think that is a record that they and we can be proud of.  Is it -- does more have to be done?  Unquestionable.  We have tough work ahead in Pakistan and in Afghanistan.  And together with our partners, we’ll make progress. 
     Q    And second, on immigration -- and, first of all, my happy birthday to the President in advance.
     Q    Oh, boy.  (Laughter.)
     Q    My second question is on immigration. 
     Q    I have a follow-up.  (Laughter.)
     MR. GIBBS:  I’m going to put George and Peter down as no happy birthday for the President.
     All right, go ahead.  I’m done.  (Laughter.)
     Q    Thank you.  Second on immigration, most of the police chiefs around the countries are against the Arizona immigration law.  What they are saying is that if this spreads around the country, it will bring more violence and it might be out of the hands of the police around the country.  So where do we go from here?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, obviously the court ruled and stayed many of the provisions that were set to go into effect last Thursday around this law.  I think police chiefs in Phoenix and Tucson -- the two largest cities in Arizona -- have, as you said, Goyal, expressed many reservations about what they believed this law would intend for them to do, and along with others, spoke out and filed briefs with the court. 
     Where it leaves us is the same place that it leaves us -- left us last week.  And if -- Senator McConnell brought up immigration earlier.  If Senator McConnell would like to solve a problem rather than to continue to talk about one that we haven’t solved at a federal level for many years -- it’s time to bring together Democrats and Republicans to do just that.
     That’s the only way we’re going to make progress on comprehensive immigration reform, is to do it together and to do it in a way that’s bipartisan.
     Q    Thanks, Robert.  With the Kagan vote coming up this week, I wanted to ask, on July 19th, written answers to the Judiciary Committee, she said that she had ceased doing her full duties as Solicitor General after the May 10th nomination.  Has she been receiving her full salary as Solicitor General since then, or should she?
     MR. GIBBS:  I’d point you over to the Department of Justice on that.  I don’t know what the pay records are.
     Q    Do you think she should receive --
 
     MR. GIBBS:  I’d point you to the Department of Justice.
     Glenn.
     Q    Robert, over the last couple of weeks you folks have put the President out there and brought folks to the briefing to emphasize sort of the things that you have accomplished in the past 18 months.  We had the -- an update on the auto bailout; we had his Iraq speech yesterday.  A lot of this doesn’t seem to be getting through to voters in general.  We saw a Gallup poll today that has the President at 41 percent, which is low, I think, on their scale for the administration.  Is it frustrating --
     MR. GIBBS:  Leaving aside that the other Gallup poll showed it at 45.  But I’ll leave Gallup to explain the margin of error.
     Q    Gallup versus Gallup.  Or is it Gallup versus Zandi?
     MR. GIBBS:  I guess.  I think Gallup is with -- kidding.  (Laughter.)  Go ahead.
     Q    Is it frustrating to the President that these messages on these accomplishments don’t seem to be getting through to people, and why do you think they’re not?
     MR. GIBBS:  Look, I would say, Glenn, I don’t think the President spends a lot of time -- the President spends a lot of time worried about how we make progress, not worried about whether people are giving him enough credit for the progress that’s been made. 
     I’ll be honest with you -- and I said this last week, Glenn -- I don’t think people -- I don’t -- I wouldn’t hold the auto investment against the American people because I don’t think the story has been told.  I don’t think that the American people knew that for the first time in 10 years we were adding jobs to the auto industry, and had added 55,000 jobs since GM emerged from bankruptcy; or that for the first quarter since 2004, all three companies at the same time posted an operating profit; or that the money invested by this administration was very likely to be repaid in full.
     I don’t -- I think in many ways the auto story where we started -- or where it began in late March of 2009, and where we are now in late July and early August of 2010 is in a much different place.  I think the President believes that, and hopes that people will, whether it’s adding jobs in the auto industry, whether it’s taking 94,000 soldiers out of Iraq, I think that the President only hopes that people look at what he’s done and base their conclusions off that. 
     I get the --
     Q    How much of it is the unemployment rate?
     MR. GIBBS:  A lot of it.
     Q      I mean, you can send him out on a sales pitch every day, but as long as the product includes 9.5 percent, can you get around that?
     MR. GIBBS:  I think as the President has said before, if a pollster called you and you thought your economic situation was not as good as it could be, it was too expensive to send your daughter to college, your neighbor had just lost their house, and your -- somebody else in your family just lost a job, and the pollster asked you how they thought the President was doing, I don’t think he would be surprised that the American people would answer to a pollster that they’re concerned.
     Q    How does he get around that, though?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, two things:  continuing to tell people what we’re doing, and to continue to tell people the choices that we have to make.  And I think, as I said earlier -- again, I don’t think a lot of people had the totality of what the auto story was.  I don’t know how many people know that we’re at the lowest point in I don’t know how many years in our troop level in Iraq, or that if you look at civilian deaths -- what are likely to be the number of civilian deaths in Iraq in 2010 and what they were at the height of the Iraq war, we’re talking about a reduction of 92 percent.
     But that’s what the President’s job is to continue to tell people what’s been done.
     Ms. Ryan.
     Q    Robert, on the crack cocaine sentencing law, it’s down from 100 to one to 18 to one, but some on Capitol Hill feel that the fight still needs to continue to bring the disparity down to one to one.  What is this administration’s efforts on that push?  Are you leaving it here and just accepting this, or moving forward, still trying to bring the disparity down?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, let me see if there’s any guidance on it.  I will say this, April, I think the signing of today’s bill into law represents the hard work of Democrats and Republicans coming -- this is a good example -- of coming together and making progress on something that people had identified as a glaring blight on the law.
     Look, I think if you look at the people that were there at that signing, they’re not of the political persuasions that either always or even part of the time agree.  I think that demonstrates the, as I said, the glaring nature of what these penalties had -- the glaring nature of what these penalties had done to people and how unfair they were.  And I think the President was proud to sign that into law.
     Q    And also, Senate Republicans are being blamed again for holding up or delaying the stand-alone vote for the Black Farmers.  And John Boyd, the head of the National Black Farmers Association, wants a meeting with the President and wants assurances that the Black Farmers will be paid their settlement monies.  And he’s likening it to the assurances that were given to Blanche Lincoln -- Senator Blanche Lincoln for $1.5 billion farm relief subsidy payments.
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, again, this administration has worked a lot over the past several months to try to get this to a point where we can make good on the judgment that was handed down, and the administration will continue to try to do that, April.
     Q    Will he meet with -- will the President meet with John Boyd at all?
     MR. GIBBS:  I think he met very recently with Valerie Jarrett.
     Q    He wants to meet with the President to express his concern.
     MR. GIBBS:  I don’t have any knowledge that that’s on the schedule.
     Q    Thank you, Robert.
     MR. GIBBS:  Margaret.
     Q    Robert, thanks.  Do you have any information, any detail about what’s on deck for Friday?  I checked the schedule and it said something about news.
     MR. GIBBS:  Off the top of my head, I don’t.  I’m trying to conjure that up, but let me see if there’s any guidance for Friday.
     Q    And then quickly, this is probably preface to Ari’s question earlier, but there is a lawsuit that the Center for Constitutional Rights and the ACLU is bringing today regarding the policies or lack -- perceived lack of policies as they relate to Mr. al-Awlaki.  And what I wanted to ask is -- I mean, you just told us there is a process in place that you’re not at liberty to discuss.  Is that going to be the government’s position, or are you going to disclose what the policy is?  Do you think there’s any merit to this lawsuit?
     MR. GIBBS:  Well, look, again, there is -- I’m just not at liberty to discuss intelligence matters, Margaret.  I would say -- I will repeat that Anwar al-Awlaki is someone who has sworn allegiance to al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, is a regional commander for that group in Yemen, has and continues to direct attacks there and, as we know, against innocent men, women and children in this country.
     And this President will take the steps necessary to keep our country safe from thugs like him.
     Q    I understand that.  But the President is also a lawyer with constitutional law training.  He made clear during the campaign that sort of dotting the i’s and crossing the t’s mattered, even if you’re going after bad guys.
     MR. GIBBS:  And I think it’s safe to assume that if -- without getting deep into this -- the President understands the process and the President will do all that is necessary to keep this country safe from people like him.
     Richard.
     Q    Just quick on the tax cuts.  Does the President want the middle-class tax cuts to be extended permanently or --
     MR. GIBBS:  Yes, permanent.
     Q    He wants permanent?
     MR. GIBBS:  Yes.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    The British Prime Minister last week said that he would not tolerate export of terrorism from Pakistan.  Does the President agree with the views --
     MR. GIBBS:  I’ll let Mr. Cameron deal with that.
     Yes, sir.
     Q    President Ahmadinejad of Iran said that he was ready for face-to-face talks with President Obama.  I was wondering if the White House has an initial reaction to that?
     MR. GIBBS:  I would say this, that obviously Iran has on any number of occasions changed their position based on I think largely the pain that they’re feeling on sanctions, based on the decisions that their government has made that don’t jibe with where the people are.  We have always said that we would be willing to sit down and discuss Iran’s illicit nuclear program if Iran is serious about doing that.  To date, that seriousness has not been there.  Iran has obligations that it needs to meet, and failure to meet those obligations will continue to result in unilateral sanctions by this government, U.N. sanctions that have been passed, European Union sanctions that have been passed, and other countries beyond this taking unilateral action.  I think those sanctions are beginning to have an impact, or else the Iranian government would not be changing its position so often about discussing its program.
     Thanks, guys.
                             END           1:39 P.M. EDT
 2:07 P.M. EDT

     THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you, everybody, please have a seat.  Have a seat. 
Well, good afternoon, everybody.
AUDIENCE:  Good afternoon.
THE PRESIDENT:  Welcome to the White House, and welcome to the United States of America.  And that includes even our friends from Ghana, who beat us in the World Cup.  (Laughter.)  Where are you?  Over there?  That's all right.  It was close.  We’ll see you in 2014.  (Laughter.)
It’s my great privilege to welcome all of you to this Young African Leaders Forum.  You’ve joined us from nearly 50 countries.  You reflect the extraordinary history and diversity of the continent.  You’ve already distinguished yourselves as leaders —- in civil society and development and business and faith communities —- and you’ve got an extraordinary future before you. 
In fact, you represent the Africa that so often is overlooked -- the great progress that many Africans have achieved and the unlimited potential that you’ve got going forward into the 21st century.
Now, I called this forum for a simple reason.  As I said when I was in Accra last year, I don’t see Africa as a world apart; I see Africa as a fundamental part of our interconnected world.  Whether it’s creating jobs in a global economy, or delivering education and health care, combating climate change, standing up to violent extremists who offer nothing but destruction, or promoting successful models of democracy and development —- for all this we have to have a strong, self-reliant and prosperous Africa.  So the world needs your talents and your creativity.  We need young Africans who are standing up and making things happen not only in their own countries but around the world.
And the United States wants to be your partner.  So I’m pleased that you’ve already heard from Secretary of State Clinton, and that we’re joined today by leaders from across my administration who are working to deepen that partnership every day.
I can’t imagine a more fitting time for this gathering.  This year, people in 17 nations across Sub-Saharan Africa are proudly celebrating 50 years of independence.  And by any measure, 1960 was an extraordinary year.  From Senegal to Gabon, from Madagascar to Nigeria, Africans rejoiced in the streets —- as foreign flags were lowered and their own were hoisted up.  So in 12 remarkable months, nearly one-third of the continent achieved independence —- a burst of self-determination that came to be celebrated as “The Year of Africa” -- at long last, these Africans were free to chart their own course and to shape their own destiny.
Now, 1960, of course, was significant for another reason.  Here in the United States of America it was the year that a candidate for president first proposed an idea for young people in our own country to devote a year or two abroad in service to the world.  And that candidate was John F. Kennedy, and that idea would become the Peace Corps -- one of our great partnerships with the world, including with Africa. 
Now, the great task of building a nation is never done.  Here in America, more than two centuries since our independence, we’re still working to perfect our union.  Across Africa today, there’s no denying the daily hardships that are faced by so many -- the struggle to feed their children, to find work, to survive another day.  And too often, that’s the Africa that the world sees.
  
But today, you represent a different vision, a vision of Africa on the move -- an Africa that’s ending old conflicts, as in Liberia, where President Sirleaf told me, today’s children have “not known a gun and not had to run”; an Africa that’s modernizing and creating opportunities -- agribusiness in Tanzania, prosperity in Botswana, political progress in Ghana and Guinea; an Africa that’s pursuing a broadband revolution that could transform the daily lives of future generations.
So it’s an Africa that can do great things, such as hosting the world’s largest sporting event.  So we congratulate our South African friends.  And while it may have been two European teams in the final match, it’s been pointed out that it was really Africa that won the World Cup.
So once again, Africa finds itself at a moment of extraordinary promise.  And as I said last year, while today’s challenges may lack some of the drama of 20th century liberation struggles, they ultimately may be even more meaningful, for it will be up to you, young people full of talent and imagination, to build the Africa for the next 50 years.
Africa’s future belongs to entrepreneurs like the small business owner from Djibouti who began selling ice cream and now runs his own accounting practice and advises other entrepreneurs -- that’s Miguil Hasan-Farah.  Is Miguil here?  There he is right there.  Don’t be shy.  There you go.  (Applause.)  
As you work to create jobs and opportunity, America will work with you, promoting the trade and investment on which growth depends.  That’s why we’re proud to be hosting the AGOA Forum this week to expand trade between our countries.  And today I’ll also be meeting with trade, commerce, and agriculture ministers from across Sub-Saharan Africa.  It’s also why our historic Food Security Initiative isn’t simply about delivering food; it’s about sharing new technologies to increase African productivity and self-sufficiency. 
Now, no one should have to pay a bribe to get a job or to get government to provide basic services.  So as part of our development strategy, we’re emphasizing transparency, accountability, and a strong civil society -- the kind of reform that can help unleash transformational change.  So Africa’s future also belongs to those who take charge of that kind of transparency and are serious about anti-corruption measures. 
Africa’s future belongs to those who take charge of their health, like the HIV/AIDS counselor from Malawi who helps others by bravely sharing her own experience of being HIV-positive -- that’s Tamara Banda.  Where is Tamara?  There she is right there. Thank you, Tamara.  (Applause.)  So our Global Health Initiative is not merely treating diseases; it’s strengthening prevention and Africa’s public health systems.  And I want to be very clear. We’ve continued to increase funds to fight HIV/AIDS to record levels, and we’ll continue to do what it takes to save lives and invest in healthier futures.
Africa’s future also belongs to societies that protects the rights of all its people, especially its women, like the journalist in Ivory Coast who has championed the rights of Muslim women and girls —- Aminata Kane-Kone.  Where is Aminata?  There she is right there.  (Applause.)  To you and to people across Africa, know that the United States of America will stand with you as you seek justice and progress and human rights and dignity of all people.
 
So the bottom line is this:  Africa’s future belongs to its young people, including a woman who inspires young people across Botswana with her popular radio show, called, “The Real Enchilada” —- and that’s Tumie Ramsden.  Where’s Tumie?  Right here -- “The Real Enchilada.”  (Applause.) 
As all of you go to -- as all of you pursue your dreams —- as you go to school, you find a job, you make your voices heard, you mobilize people —- America wants to support your aspirations. So we’re going to keep helping empower African youth —- supporting education, increasing educational exchanges like the one that brought my father from Kenya in the days when Kenyans were throwing off colonial rule and reaching for a new future.  And we’re helping to strengthen grassroots networks of young people who believe -- as they’re saying in Kenya today -— “Yes, Youth Can!”  “Yes, Youth Can!”  (Laughter and applause.) 
Now, this is a forum, so we've devoted some time where I can answer some questions.  I don't want to do all the talking.  I want to hear from you about your goals and how we can partner more effectively to help you reach them.  And we want this to be the beginning of a new partnership and create networks that will promote opportunities for years to come. 
But I do want to leave you with this.  You are the heirs of the independence generation that we celebrate this year.  Because of their sacrifice, you were born in independent African states. And just as the achievements of the last 50 years inspire you, the work you do today will inspire future generations.
So -- I understand, Tumie, you like to Tweet.  (Laughter.)  And she shared words that have motivated so many -- this is what Tumie said:  “If your actions inspire others to dream more, to learn more, to do more and become more, then you are a leader.”   
So each of you are here today because you are a leader.  You’ve inspired other young people in your home countries; you’ve inspired us here in the United States.  The future is what you make it.  And so if you keep dreaming and keep working and keep learning and don’t give up, then I'm confident that your countries and the entire continent and the entire world will be better for it.
So thank you very much, everybody.  (Applause.) 
All right, with that, I'm going to take questions.  Now, here are the rules -- (laughter.)  People, everybody who has a question, they can raise their hand.  In order to be fair, I'm going to call girl, boy, girl, boy.  We're going to alternate.  And try to keep your question relatively short; I'll try to keep my answer relatively short, so I can answer as many questions as possible, because we have a limited amount of time.  Okay?
I'm going to start with this young lady, right here.  And please introduce yourself and tell me where you're from also
Q    Okay.  Thank you very much.  I will express myself in French, if that is --
THE PRESIDENT:  That's fine.  Somebody will translate for me?  Yes?  Go ahead.  Just make sure that you stop after each sentence, because otherwise she will forget what you had to say.
Q    Thank you very much.  (Speaks in French and is translated.) Mr. President, hello.  And hello, everybody.  I'm Fatima Sungo (phonetic) of Mali.  I do have a question for you and I look forward to getting your answer.  But before I do so, I'd like to begin by telling you, Mr. President, how truly honored and privileged we feel to be with you today, and how privileged we are to express the voices of African youth, of African young leaders, and of course fully appreciate your recognizing us and giving us the opportunity to be here, and also recognizing our own responsibility to take your voice back home.
I'd like to say that I'm convinced this is an important watershed moment, this is the beginning of important change, the wonderful initiative you had to call us all here.  I wonder when did you see that particular light?  When did you imagine that bringing us here would be such a good idea?  I'm wondering what your thought process was, Mr. President.
THE PRESIDENT:  Well, first of all, one of the things that happens when you're President is that other people have good ideas and then you take credit for them.  (Laughter.)  So I want to make sure that I don't take credit for my ideas -- for these ideas -- because the truth is my staff works so hard in trying to find new ways that we can communicate not just to the heads of state, but also at the grassroots.
     And the reason, I think, is because when you think about Africa, Africa is the youngest continent.  Many of the countries that you represent, half of the people are under 30.  And oftentimes if all you’re doing is talking to old people like me, then you’re not reaching the people who are going to be providing the energy, the new initiatives, the new ideas.  And so we thought that it would be very important for us to have an opportunity to bring the next generation of leaders together.
     That's point number one.  Point number two -- and I’m going to be blunt occasionally during this forum, so I hope you don't mind -- sometimes the older leaders get into old habits, and those old habits are hard to break.  And so part of what we wanted to do was to communicate directly to people who may not assume that the old ways of doing business are the ways that Africa has to do business.
     So in some of your countries, freedom of the press is still restricted.  There’s no reason why that has to be the case.  There’s nothing inevitable about that.  And young people are more prone to ask questions, why shouldn’t we have a free press?  In some of your countries, the problem of corruption is chronic.  And so people who have been doing business in your country for 20, 30 years, they’ll just throw up their hands and they’ll say, ah, that's the way it is.
     But Robert Kennedy had a wonderful saying, where he said, some people see things and ask why, and others see things that need changing and ask, why not.  And so I think that your generation is poised to ask those questions, “Why not?”  Why shouldn’t Africa be self-sustaining agriculturally?  There’s enough arable land that if we restructure how agriculture and markets work in Africa, not only could most countries in Africa feed themselves, but they could export those crops to help feed the world.  Why not?
     New infrastructure -- it used to be that you had to have telephone lines and very capital intensive in order to communicate.  Now we have the Internet and broadband and cell phones, so you -- the entire continent may be able to leapfrog some other places that were more highly developed and actually reach into the future of communications in ways that we can’t even imagine yet.  Why not?
     So that’s the purpose of this.  I also want to make sure that all of you are having an opportunity to meet each other, because you can reinforce each other as you are struggling and fighting in your own countries for a better future.  You will now have a network of people that help to reinforce what it is that you’re trying to do.  And you know that sometimes change makes you feel lonely.  Now you’ve got a group of people who can help reinforce what you’re doing.
     Okay.  It’s a gentleman’s turn.  This is why there are leaders, everybody has something to say.  But you don’t have to snap.  No, no, no.  It’s a guy’s turn -- this gentleman right here.
     Q    Mr. President, my name is Bai Best (phonetic) from Liberia.  The late Dr. Solomon Carter Fuller was the first black -- the first black psychiatrist in America and probably in the world.  In my country in Liberia, where there are a lot of great people who make landmark accomplishments both in their nation and in the world, many of them are not recognized for their accomplishments.  Today, Dr. Fuller’s name is etched where there is a medical -- there is a psychiatric center named in his honor at a place in Boston.  There are many other young African and young Liberian talented people who have great ideas and who want to come back home and contribute to their countries, to the development of their peoples.  But many times, their efforts -- their patriotic efforts -- are stifled by corrupt or sometimes jealous officials in government and in other sectors.  It’s an age-old problem.  Many times, they want to seek -- that basically leads them to seek greener pastures and better appreciation abroad instead of coming back home.  What are your thoughts on this?
THE PRESIDENT:  Well, look, this is a problem that’s not unique to Africa.  Given different stages of development around the world, one of the problems that poorer countries often have is that the best educated and the most talented have opportunities elsewhere.  And so there’s what’s called the “brain drain” -- people saying, I can make 10 times as much money if I’m a doctor in London as I can if I’m a doctor back home.
     And so this is a historic problem.  Here is the interesting moment that we’re in, though -- if you look at where the greatest opportunities are, they're actually now in emerging markets.  There are countries in Africa that are growing 7, 8, 9 percent a year.  So if you’re an entrepreneur now with an idea, you may be able to grow faster and achieve more back home that you could here.
     Now, it entails greater risk, so it may be safer to emigrate.  But it may be that you can actually achieve more, more quickly back home.  And so the question is for young leaders like yourselves, where do you want to have the most impact?  And you’re probably going to have more impact at home whether you’re a businessman or woman, or you are a doctor or you are an attorney, or you are an organizer.  That's probably going to be the place where you can make the biggest change.
     Now, you’re absolutely right, though, that the conditions back home have to be right where you can achieve these things.  So if you want to go back home and start a business, and it turns out that you have to pay too many bribes to just get the business started, at some point you may just give up.
     And that's why one of the things that we’re trying to do -- working with my team -- when we emphasize development, good governance is at the center of development.  It’s not separate.  Sometimes people think, well, that's a political issue and then there’s an economic issue.  No.  If you have a situation where you can’t start a business or people don't want to invest because there’s not a clear sense of rule of law, that is going to stifle development.
     If farmers have so many middlemen to get their crops to market that they're making pennies when ultimately their crops are being sold for $10, over time that stifles agricultural development in a country.  So what we want to do is make sure that in our interactions with your governments, we are constantly emphasizing this issue of good governance because I have confidence that you’ll be able to figure out what changes need to be made in your country.
     I’ve always said the destiny of Africa is going to be determined by Africans.  It’s not going to be determined by me.  It’s not going to be determined by people outside of the continent.  It’s going to be determined by you.  All we can do is make sure that your voices are heard and you’re able to rise up and take hold of these opportunities.  If you do that, I think that there are going to be a lot of people who -- even if they're educated abroad -- want to come home to make their mark.
     All right.  Let’s see, I’m going to call on this young lady right here.
     Q    (Speaks in Portuguese and is translated.)  Good afternoon, everyone.  And thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity.
     THE PRESIDENT:  That sounds like Portuguese.  (Laughter.) 
     Q    It is, indeed, from Mozambique, sir.
     THE PRESIDENT:  Great.
     Q    Knowing, Mr. President, that, of course, America is a reference point for democracy in the world, and that you, sir, are, indeed a protagonist in that context today, I would love to hear from you, sir, what you would recommend to the young people in Africa and to civil society, in particular, in terms of following principles of nonviolence and good governance and democratic principles in our country.  Because, of course, our reality is very often quite starkly different.  There are 80 percent abstentionism often in elections, and elections that, indeed, lack transparency.  And all too often lead, alas, to social conflict.  Thank you.
     THE PRESIDENT:  Well, let me say, first of all, that if you are -- just as I said that you can’t separate politics from economics, you can’t separate conflict from development.  So the constant conflict, often ethnically-based conflict, that has taken place in Africa is a profound detriment to development and it’s self-reinforcing.
     If you have conflict and violence, that scares off investors.  That makes it more difficult for business people to create opportunities, which means that young people then don't have work, which means that they are more prone to be recruited in violent conflicts.  And you can get a vicious cycle.
     So I am a profound believer in not looking at violence as a solution to problems.  And I think the moral and ethical power that comes with nonviolence when properly mobilized is profound.
     Number two, I think the most important thing that maybe young people here can do is to promote the values of openness, transparency, honest debate, civil disagreements within your own groups and your own organizations, because that forms good habits.  If you are part of an organization -- and I’m going to speak to the men here, in particular -- if you are part of an organization where you profess democracy but women don't have an equal voice in your organization, then you're a hypocrite, right? And that is something that -- (applause.)  And that is something that we have to be honest about.  Oftentimes, women are not getting the same voice in African countries, despite the fact that they are carrying more than their fair share of burdens. 
So within your own organizations, within your own networks, modeling good democratic practices, listening to people who you disagree with respectfully, making sure that everybody gets a seat at the table -- all those things I think are very important.
Because part of what I’m going to -- what I’m hoping for is that some of you will end up being leaders of your country some day.  And if you think about it, back in the 1960s, when all these -- your grandparents, great-grandparents were obtaining independence, fighting for independence, the first leaders, they all said they were for democracy.  And then what ends up happening is you’ve been in power for a while and you say, well, I must be such a good ruler that it is for the benefit of the people that I need to stay here.  And so then you start changing the laws, or you start intimidating and jailing opponents.  And pretty soon, young people just like yourself -- full of hope and promise -- end up becoming exactly what they fought against.
So one of the things that I think everybody here has to really internalize is the notion that -- I think it was Gandhi who once said you have to be the change that you seek.  You have to be the change that you seek.  And one of the wonderful things about the United States is that in my position as President there oftentimes where I get frustrated, I think I know more than some of my critics.  And yet, we have institutionalized the notion that those critics have every right to criticize me, no matter how unreasonable I think they may be.  And I have to stand before the people for an election, and I’m limited to two terms -- it doesn’t matter how good a job I do.  And that’s good, because what that means is that we’ve got to -- we’ve instituted a culture where the institutions of democracy are more important than any one individual. 
And, now, it’s not as if we’re perfect.  Obviously, we’ve got all kinds of problems as well.  But what it does mean is that the peaceful transfer of power and the notion that people always have a voice -- our trust in that democratic process is one that has to be embraced in all your countries as well.
     Okay?  All right, it’s a gentleman’s turn.  Let me try to get this side of the table here.  This gentleman right here.  I’m not going to get everybody, so I apologize in advance.
     Q    Thank you very much, Mr. President.  I'm from Malawi.  Mr. President, HIV/AIDS is greatly affecting development in Africa.  And if this continues, I’m afraid I think Africa has no future.  And I think the young people like us must bring change. And we really need a strong HIV prevention program.  But, again, access to treatment must be there. 
I attended the recent World AIDS Conference in Vienna, and the critics were saying that the worst -- the U.S. government is not supporting enough HIV/AIDS work in Africa through the PEPFAR and the Global Fund.  But, again, on the other side, other HIV/AIDS activists are saying that Africa on its own has not mobilized enough resources to fight the HIV/AIDS pandemic and they are largely depending on the West.
I think the challenge for us as African young leaders is to make sure that this comes to an end and we really need to reduce the transmission.  I don’t know -- from your perspective, what can we do to make sure that this comes to a stop?  Otherwise, it’s greatly affecting development in Africa.
THE PRESIDENT:  Good.  Well, let me start by just talking about the United States and what we’re doing.  I had some disagreements with my predecessor, but one of the outstanding things that President Bush did was to initiate the PEPFAR program.  It’s a huge investment in battling HIV/AIDS both with respect to prevention and also with respect to treatment.  Billions of dollars were committed.  We have built off of that. 
So when you hear critics -- what the critics are saying is that although I’ve increased the funding of the PEPFAR program, they would like to see it increased even more, which I’m sympathetic to, given the fact that the need is so great.  But understand I’ve increased it; I haven’t decreased it -- at a time when the United States is suffering from the worst economic -- just coming out of the worst economic recession that we’ve seen since the 1930s.  Nevertheless, because of our commitment to this issue, we’ve actually increased funding. 
Now, we have couched it in a broader initiative we call the Global Health Initiative.  Because even as we’re battling HIV/AIDS, we want to make sure that we are thinking not only in terms of treatment, but also in terms of prevention and preventing transmission.
We’re never going to have enough money to simply treat people who are constantly getting infected.  We’ve got to have a mechanism to stop the transmission rate.  And so one of the things we’re trying to do is to build greater public health infrastructure, find what prevention programs are working, how can we institutionalize them, make them culturally specific -- because not every program is going to be appropriate for every country.
I will say that in Africa, in particular, one thing we do know is that empowering women is going to be critical to reducing the transmission rate.  We do know that.  Because so often women, not having any control over sexual practices and their own body, end up having extremely high transmission rates.
So the bottom line is we’re going to focus on prevention, building a public health infrastructure.  We’re still going to be funding, at very high levels, antiviral drugs.  But keep in mind, we will never have enough money -- it will be endless, an endless effort if the transmission rates stay high and we’re just trying to treat people after their sick.
     It’s the classic story of a group of people come upon all these bodies in a stream.  And everybody jumps in and starts pulling bodies out, but one wise person goes downstream to see what’s exactly happening that's causing all these people to drown or fall in the water.  And that's I think what we have to do, is go downstream to see how can we reduce these transmission rates overall.
     And obviously -- when I visited Kenya, for example -- just in terms of education -- Michelle and I, we both got tested near the village where my father was born.  We got publicly tested so that we would know what our status was.  That was just one example of the kinds of educational mechanisms that we can use that hopefully can make some difference. 
     All right?  Okay, it’s a woman’s turn.  Okay, this one right here.
     Q    Thank you, very much, Mr. President.  And greetings from Ghana.  We are looking forward fervently to 2014 --  (laughter) -- for a repeat.  And I recollect that I was hosting a radio program the day of the match.  And we have a football pundit in Ghana -- he doesn’t speak English quite well, but very passionate.  And so I was interviewing him about what the psyche of our boys should be ahead of the match.  And he said to me, “This is not war, it is football.  If it were to be war, then maybe we should be afraid because the might of America is more than us.”  (Laughter.)  This is football.  They should go out there and be the best that they could be.  And they did.
     THE PRESIDENT:  Well, they did an excellent job.  They were a great team.
     Q    Mr. President, my question now is that I hear a lot of young African leaders wonder how committed America would be to a partnership.  I hear those who are cynical about the notion of partnership.  They ask -- and always they ask, partnership?  What kind of fair partnership can exist between a strong and a weak nation?
     And so as we prepare ourselves for the future, we ask the same question of America:  How committed is your country to ensuring that the difficult decisions that young people have to make about trade, about agriculture, about support, are made -- to the extent that they may not be in the interest of America?  Because they tell me also that America will protect its interest over and above all else.  Is America committed to ensuring a partnership that might not necessarily be beneficial to America, but truly beneficial to the sovereign interest of the countries that we represent?
     THE PRESIDENT:  Well, let me say this.  All countries look out for their interests.  So -- and I’m the President of the United States, so my job is to look out for the people of the United States.  That's my job, right?  (Applause.) 
     Now, I actually think, though, that the interests of the United States and the interests of the continent of Africa greatly overlap.  We have a huge interest in seeing development throughout Africa -- because we are a more mature economy, Africa is a young and growing economy, and if you can buy more iPods and buy more products and buy more services and buy more tractors from us, that we can sell to a fast-growing continent, that creates jobs here in the United States of America.
     We have a huge interest in your public health systems because if we’re reducing greatly HIV/AIDS transmissions in Africa, then that will have a positive effect on HIV rates internationally, because of the transmigration of diseases back and forth in an international world.  And not to mention, if I’m not spending all this money on PEPFAR, that's money I can spend somewhere else.  So I’m going to be incentivized to see Africa do well.  That's in our interest. 
     And the truth of the matter is, is that whereas with some regions of the world, we do have some genuine conflicts of interest -- let’s say on trade, for example -- the truth is that the United States, we don't have huge conflicts when it comes to trade because, frankly, the trade between the United States and Africa is so small, so modest, that very few U.S. companies, U.S. commercial interests are impacted.
     That's why AGOA, our trade arrangement with Africa -- we can eliminate tariffs and subsidies and allow all sorts of goods to come in partly because you are not our primary competition.
     Now, I don't want to pretend that there aren’t ever going to be conflicts.  There will be.  There’s going to be difference in world views.  There are going to be some agricultural products where there are certain interests in the United States or there are certain interests in Europe that want to prevent those from coming in, even though, in the aggregate, it would not have a huge impact on the U.S. economy.  And so there are going to be occasional areas of tension.  But overall, the reason you should have confidence that we want a partnership is because your success will enhance our position rather than reduce it. 
Also Africa has some of our most loyal friends.  Every survey that's taken, when you ask what continent generally has the most positive views about America, it turns out Africa generally has a positive view of America and positive experiences.  So I think that you should feel confident even if I’m not President that the American people genuinely want to see Africa succeed. 
     What the American people don't want is to feel like their efforts at helping are wasted.  So if at a time of great constraint, we are coming up with aid, those aid dollars need to go to countries that are actually using them effectively.  And if they're not using them effectively, then they should go to countries that are.
     And one of the things that I’ve said to my development team is I want us to have high standards in terms of performance and evaluation when we have these partnerships -- because a partnership is a two-way street.  It means that, on the one hand, we’re accountable to you and that we have to listen to you and make sure that any plans that we have, have developed indigenously.  On the other hand, it also means you’re accountable.  So you can’t just say, give me this, give me that, and then if it turns out that it’s not working well, that's not your problem.  Right?  It has to be a two-way street. 
     Okay, looks like this side has not gotten a question here.  So how about this gentleman right here.
     Q    Thank you, Mr. President -- I'm from Zimbabwe.  Currently our government is in a transition between the former ruling party Zanu PF and the Movement for Democratic Change.  And within this same context, Zimbabwe is currently under restrictive measures, especially for those who are party in line with Robert Mugabe under the ZIDERA Act.  How has been the success of ZIDERA -- the formation of the inclusive government?  Because in Zimbabwe, Robert Mugabe is still using the rhetoric of sanctions, racist, property rights abuse, human rights abuse, in violation to the rule of law.  How has been the success of that towards the implementation -- the success or the growth of young people?
     THE PRESIDENT:  Well, you probably have a better answer than me.  So you should be sharing with our team what you think would make the most sense.  I’ll be honest with you -- I’m heartbroken when I see what’s happened in Zimbabwe.  I think Mugabe is an example of a leader who came in as a liberation fighter and -- I’m just going to be very blunt -- I do not see him serving his people well.  And the abuses, the human rights abuses, the violence that's been perpetrated against opposition leaders I think is terrible.
Now, Changerai has tried to work -- despite the fact that he himself has been beaten and imprisoned, he has now tried to work to see if there is a gradual transition that might take place.  But so far, the results have not been what we had hoped. 
     And this always poses a difficult question for U.S. foreign policy because, on the one hand, we don't want to punish the people for the abuses of a leader; on the other hand, we have very little leverage other than saying, if there are just systematic abuses by a government, we are not going to deal with them commercially, we’re not going to deal with them politically, in ways that we would with countries that are observing basic human rights principles. 
     And so there have been discussions when I’ve traveled with leaders in the Southern African region about whether or not sanctions against Zimbabwe are or are not counterproductive.  I will tell you I would love nothing more than to be able to open up greater diplomatic relationships and economic and commercial relationships with Zimbabwe.  But in order to do so, we’ve got to see some signal that it will not simply entrench the same past abuses but rather will move us in a new direction that actually helps the people.
     And Zimbabwe is a classic example of a country that should be the breadbasket for an entire region.  It’s a spectacular country.  Now, it had to undergo a transition from white minority rule that was very painful and very difficult.  But they have chosen a path that's different than the path that South Africa chose.
     South Africa has its problems, but from what everybody could see during the World Cup, the potential for moving that country forward as a multiracial, African democracy that can succeed on the world stage, that's a model that so far at least Zimbabwe has not followed.  And that's where I’d like to see it go.  All right?
     How much more time do I have, guys?  Last question?  I’m sorry -- last question.  Last question.  No, it’s a young lady’s turn.  This one right here.
     Q    Good afternoon, Mr. President, your excellencies.  I am from Somalia.  I came all the way here with one question, and that is, living in conflict in a country that has confused the whole world, and being part of the diaspora that went back to risk our lives in order to make Somalia a better place, especially with what we’re going through right now -- how much support do we expect from the U.S.?  And not support just in terms of financially or aid, but support as an ear, as a friend, as somebody who hears and listens to those of us who are putting our lives and our families at risk to defend humanity.
     THE PRESIDENT:  Well, I think you will have enormous support from the people of the United States when it comes to trying to create a structure and framework in Somalia that works for the Somali people.
     Now, the history of Somalia over the last 20 years has been equally heartbreaking, if not more so.  You have not had a effective, functioning government that can provide basic services.  It’s been rife with conflict.  And now the entire region is threatened because of radical extremists who have taken root in Somalia, taking advantage of what they perceive to be a failing state, to use that as a base to launch attacks, most recently in Uganda.
And obviously the United States expresses its deepest condolences to the lives that were lost in Kampala -- at the very moment of the World Cup.  And it offered two contrasting visions. You have this wonderful, joyous celebration in South Africa at the same time as you have a terrorist explosion in Kampala.
     So we desperately want Somalia to succeed.  And this is another example of where our interests intersect.  If you have extremist organizations taking root in Somalia, ultimately that can threaten the United States as well as Uganda, as well as Kenya, as well as the entire region.
     So right now you’ve got a transitional government that is making some efforts.  I don’t think anybody expects Somalia anytime in the next few years to suddenly be transformed into a model democracy.  Whatever governance structures take place in Somalia have to be aware of the tribal and traditional structures and clan structures that exist within Somalia.  But certainly what we can do is create a situation where people -- young people are not carrying around rifles, shooting each other on the streets.  And we want to be a partner with Somalia in that effort, and we will continue to do so. 
And some of it is financial, some of it is developmental, some of it is being able to help basic infrastructure.  In some cases, we may try to find a portion of the country that is relatively stable and start work there to create a model that the rest of the country can then look at and say, this is a different path than the one that we’re taking right now. 
     But in the end, I think that this metaphor of the success of the World Cup and the bombing shows that each of you are going to be confronted with two paths.  There’s going to be a path that takes us into a direction of more conflict, more bloodshed, less economic development, continued poverty even as the rest of the world races ahead -- or there’s a vision in which people come together for the betterment and development of their own country.
     And for all the great promise that’s been fulfilled over the last 50 years, I want you to understand -- because I think it’s important for us to be honest with ourselves -- Africa has also missed huge opportunities for too long.  And I’ll just give you one example.
     When my father traveled to the United States and got his degree in the early ’60s, the GDP of Kenya was actually on partner, maybe actually higher than the GDP of South Korea.  Think about that.  All right?  So when I was born, Kenya per capita might have been wealthier than South Korea.  Now it’s not even close.  Well, that’s 50 years that was lost in terms of opportunities.  When it comes to natural resources, when it comes to the talent and potential of the people, there’s no reason why Kenya shouldn’t have been on that same trajectory.
     And so 50 years from now, when you look back you want to make sure that the continent hasn’t missed those opportunities as well.  We want to make sure of that as well.  And the United States wants to listen to you and work with you.  And so when you go back and you talk to your friends and you say, what was the main message the President had -- we are rooting for your success, and we want to work with you to achieve that success, but ultimately success is going to be in your hands.  And being a partner means that we can be there by your side, but we can’t do it for you. 
Okay, thank you very much, everybody.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  
                                       END                   3:03 P.M. EDT                   
 