“In all parts of the world, we see the promise of innovation to make government more open and accountable. And now, we must build on that progress. And when we gather back here next year, we should bring specific commitments to promote transparency; to fight corruption; to energize civic engagement; to leverage new technologies so that we strengthen the foundations of freedom in our own countries, while living up to the ideals that can light the world.”

--President Obama, September 23, 2010
The Challenge
	In his address to the United Nations General Assembly in September 2010, President Obama spoke of open economies, open societies, and open governments as the “strongest foundation for human progress.” He recognized that the work of strengthening democratic government requires sustained commitment, and that countries around the world are taking innovative steps to better serve the people they represent. He issued a challenge to the leaders assembled in New York to gather together again in September of 2011 with specific commitments and plans of action to promote transparency, fight corruption, energize civil society, and to leverage new technologies.
Answering the Call
	Responding to the President’s challenge, a group of governments and civil society organizations spanning the globe have come together to form the Open Government Partnership (OGP), a new multilateral initiative that supports national efforts to promote transparency, fight corruption, strengthen accountability, and empower citizens. At the core of the Partnership is a commitment from participating countries to undertake meaningful new steps as part of a concrete action plan, developed and implemented in close consultation with their citizens.
Led in its first year by the United States and Brazil, OGP is a unique partnership with a steering committee composed of governments (Brazil, Indonesia, Mexico, Norway, the Philippines, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States) and civil society organizations (Africa Center for Open Governance (Kenya), Instituto de Estudos Socioeconômicos (Brazil), Instituto Mexicano para la Competitividad (Mexico), International Budget Partnership (international), MKSS (India), National Security Archive (U.S.), Revenue Watch Institute (international), Transparency and Accountability Initiative (international), and Twaweza (Tanzania)).
The Launch of the Open Government Partnership
	Today in New York, President Obama and President Rousseff hosted the formal launch of OGP at an event with Heads of State and senior officials from 46 countries. The high-level meeting focused attention on the shared challenge of improving governance, and demonstrated a strong political commitment around the world to the kinds of reforms necessary to enhance transparency, fight corruption, and strengthen mechanisms of democratic accountability.
The eight founding governments embraced an Open Government Declaration in which they pledged to advance the core principles of open government. And each government presented an action plan with concrete commitments to put the principles of the Declaration into practice.
The Partnership also welcomed the commitment of the following 38 governments to join OGP and deliver their own action plans in Brazil in March 2012: Albania, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, the Czech Republic, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Estonia, Georgia, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kenya, Latvia, Liberia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Malta, Moldova, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, Peru, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Tanzania, Turkey, Ukraine, and Uruguay.
Each of these countries has already demonstrated a commitment to open government across four key areas – fiscal and budget transparency, freedom of information, asset disclosures for public officials, and citizen engagement – and published a formal letter of intent to participate.
The Open Government Declaration
	The Declaration is a high-level political statement by the leaders of the eight founding governments of the value of openness, and their commitment to:


		Promote openness, because more information about governmental activities should be timely and freely available to people;

		Engage citizens in decision-making, because this makes government more innovative and responsive;

		Implement the highest standards of professional integrity, because those in power must serve the people and not themselves; and

		Increase access to new technologies because of their unprecedented potential to help people realize their aspirations for access to information and a more powerful voice in how they are governed.

Eight Action Plans
	Today, as part of the formal launch, the eight founding governments delivered action plans pledging new commitments to promote transparency, empower citizens, fight corruption, and harness the power of new technologies. Each action plan contains detailed commitments in a wide variety of areas, developed by governments in consultation with citizens. Among the highlights, the action plans include commitments to promote:


		Effective management of natural resources revenues: The United States will join the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) as an implementing country – forging a new partnership between government and industry to ensure that taxpayers receive every dollar they are due from the extraction of our natural resources. (You can view the full U.S. National Action Plan here.)

		Delivering public information: Brazil will develop several activities toward increasing active transparency and open data, including restructuring the Transparency Portal and launching the Brazil Open Data Portal, in order to converge to the appropriate environment for future enactment of the Access to Information Law.

		Gender equality: Norway will promote gender equality and women’s full participation in civic life, the private sector, public administration and political processes, including by: following up the recommendations of the government white paper on equal pay; launching an effort to have more women apply for top posts in the private sector; and undertaking an initiative to strengthen the role of women in local democracy and develop a gender equality program with all municipalities.

		Open data: The United Kingdom will promote improvements in outcomes and accountability in the public sector by transforming the rights of citizens to obtain data from public authorities and establishing standards and frameworks to embed a culture of transparency in the UK.

		Citizen participation: The Philippines will extend participatory budgeting across the government to 12 government departments and 6 government corporations by 2012; establish an empowerment fund to support bottom-up involvement in development planning and budgeting; and institutionalize social audits as a tool for monitoring the implementation of public infrastructure projects.

		Service delivery: South Africa will enhance the capacity and capabilities of communities to access and claim their socio-economic rights through the roll-out of national public education campaigns and set up “Service Delivery Improvement Forums” in all nine provinces to provide timely citizen report cards on service delivery at the community level.

		Public integrity: Indonesia will pursue an ambitious effort to bring greater transparency to range of critical areas that have been sources of corruption in the public sector, with commitments to publish basic information and performance data for the police and public prosecution service, the tax court, the immigration office, the customs office, and the land administration office. They will also increase the transparency of civil service recruitment.

		Government transparency: Mexico will increase the publication of socially useful information in four key areas – budget allocation, security, education, and telecommunications – in order to strengthen public integrity and public participation, and to enhance the oversight of performance in the education sector to improve educational quality.

The Domestic Open Government Initiative
	In addition to committing to implement EITI, among the highlights of the U.S. National Action Plan:


		The White House recently announced the launch of the “We the People” petition platform to give Americans a direct line to voice their concerns to the Administration via online petitions. In addition, the White House plans to publish the source code of the recently announced “We the People” petition platform so that it is available to any government around the world that seeks to solicit and respond to the concerns of the public. This will foster greater participation in government.

		The Administration will launch a platform called ExpertNet that will enable government officials to better communicate with citizens who have expertise on a pertinent topic. It will give members of the public an opportunity to participate in a public consultation relevant to their areas of interest and knowledge, and allow officials to pose questions to and interact with the public in order to receive useful and relevant feedback. ExpertNet will foster greater collaboration within government.

		The Administration will continue work on a new civil service personnel category (or job series) for officials who specialize in administering FOIA and other information programs. It is important to recognize the professional nature of the work done by those administering FOIA. In addition, the Administration will expand the use of technology to achieve greater efficiencies in FOIA administration, including utilization of technology to assist in searching for and processing records.

		Recently, Congress nearly enacted legislation that would eliminate loopholes in existing whistleblower protections, provide protections for employees in the intelligence community, and create pilot programs to explore potential structural reforms in the remedial process. The Administration will continue to work with Congress to enact this legislation. But if Congress remains deadlocked, the Administration will explore options for utilizing executive branch authority to strengthen and expand whistleblower protections.

		The Administration will launch an initiative that will recommend reforms and require reporting on current records management policies and practices. The initiative will consider changes to existing laws and ask how technology can be leveraged to improve records management while making it cost-effective. The initiative will seek a reformed, digital-era, governmentwide records management framework that promotes accountability and performance.

Brazil 2012 and Beyond
	Six months from now, on March 5th and 6th, 2012, Brazil will host the second high-level meeting of OGP. A group of countries – including the 38 who expressed their formal intent to participate today – will endorse the Open Government Declaration and deliver their own action plans to strengthen the pillars of open and accountable government.
The founding governments are committed to continuing the Partnership beyond Brazil, with commitments from the United Kingdom, Indonesia, and Mexico to chair the effort in subsequent years. OGP will work actively to expand the ranks of participating countries, engage civil society and the private sector, and to help countries deliver meaningful reforms that increase government accountability, effectiveness, and efficiency.
Three-year commitment by 13 major banks will help increase lending to small businesses in underserved communities
WASHINGTON – Speaking at Wrap Tite, Inc. – a small business in Solon, Ohio – Vice President Biden and Small Business Administration (SBA) Administrator Karen Mills today urged Congress to pass the American Jobs Act. The American Jobs Act is an important step to help small businesses in Ohio and across the country continue to grow and hire more workers. Vice President Biden and Administrator Mills also announced commitments by 13 private lenders, including many of the largest banks in the country, to increase lending for small businesses by a combined $20 billion over the next three years.
Thanks to a recent $1.5 million SBA-supported loan, Wrap Tite – a manufacturer and distributer of stretch wrap and other packing and shipping products – was able to purchase and renovate a new facility in Solon and hire five new workers. The new small business lending commitments announced today, which represent an increase of 10% or more beyond the current levels of lending at many of the participating banks, mean more small businesses like Wrap Tite will have access to the capital they need to help grow the nation’s economy at the local level.
“Small businesses like Wrap Tite are the real engines of our economy, which is why Congress should cut their taxes and put money back in the pockets of their customers by passing the American Jobs Act right away,” Vice President Biden said. “The only way we’re going to turn the vicious economic cycle we’ve been in into a virtuous one is by cutting taxes on our small businesses and making sure they can get the loans they need to grow and hire more workers.”
“We know that many small businesses, particularly in traditionally underserved communities, still face challenges in accessing the capital they need to buy inventory, take on that next new order and hire new workers,” Administrator Mills said. “These commitments by our lending partners leverage both commercial and government programs that work and will provide billions of capital to help small businesses all across the country grow and create jobs, and drive local economic growth.”
Vice President Biden also highlighted other key ways the American Jobs Act will help small businesses across the country grow and hire, including significant tax cuts:


		Every single business would see its payroll tax cut in half for the first $5 million in wages.  If a small business has 10 workers on payroll making a typical wage, this is a $15,000 tax break.

		Small businesses growing their payrolls, like Wrap Tite, would get a full 6.2% payroll tax cut for every additional dollar they spend on hiring or increasing wages, covering the first $50 million of increased wages from the previous year.

		Businesses would get tax credits for hiring unemployed veterans or long-term unemployed workers.

		Businesses purchasing new equipment would be able to expense their investments through the end of next year.  Because Wrap Tite made a $250,000 investment in three new machines over the past year, they could already benefit from expensing provisions currently in place; the American Jobs Act would extend that tax relief through the end of 2012.

The Vice President concluded by pointing out that passing the American Jobs Act is about choices – whether Congress will choose to preserve tax loopholes for corporations and the wealthy or choose to pass new job-creating tax cuts and infrastructure investments.
	 
	“We can either keep 280,000 teachers in their classrooms, or we can preserve tax loopholes for oil and gas companies.  We can either keep cops and firefighters on the job, or we can keep giving corporate jet owners special tax breaks,” said Vice President Biden.
SBA offers government guarantees on loans to small businesses made by private lenders.  In Fiscal Year 2011, SBA has supported over $28 billion in small business lending.  The commitment from lenders today will build on that success and increase the flow of capital to small businesses throughout the country.
The following financial institutions were represented at the announcement:
Wells Fargo
	Key Corp
	Regions Financial Corporation
	Huntington Bancshares Incorporated
	M&T Bank Corporation
	JP Morgan Chase & Company
	Citizens Financial Group, Inc.
	Citigroup
	Bank of America Merrill Lynch
	TD Bank
	US Bank
	PNC Bank NA.
	Sun Trust Banks, Inc.

President to visit Computer History Museum for “Putting America Back to Work: LinkedIn Presents a Town Hall with President Obama”

	WASHINGTON, DC – On Monday, September 26th, President Obama will travel to Mountain View, California to participate in “Putting America Back to Work: LinkedIn Presents a Town Hall with President Obama.”  At the town hall, the President will answer questions about job creation and the economy from a live audience made up of LinkedIn members and employees, as well as questions that have been submitted from LinkedIn members across the country.

	In conjunction with the President's visit, LinkedIn has launched a community focused on job creation and the economy. Through this group, people are invited to join the conversation with President Obama by submitting questions for the town hall, contributing comments, and sharing content with their own network. This group will serve as a platform for LinkedIn users to continue the discussion on putting America back to work and provide opportunities for LinkedIn members to engage with the White House and Administration officials following the town hall. People can submit questions for the President HERE and watch the town hall live on LinkedIn and WhiteHouse.gov/live.

	LinkedIn is the world's largest professional network with more than 120 million members worldwide. At “Putting America Back to Work: LinkedIn Presents a Town Hall with President Obama,” the President will hear directly from LinkedIn members who range from small business owners and employees to community college students to veterans.
