
	MEMORANDUM FOR THE HEADS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES

	SUBJECT: Accelerating Technology Transfer and Commercialization of Federal Research in Support of High Growth Businesses

Section 1.  Policy.  Innovation fuels economic growth, the creation of new industries, companies, jobs, products and services, and the global competitiveness of U.S. industries.  One driver of successful innovation is technology transfer, in which the private sector adapts Federal research for use in the marketplace.  One of the goals of my Administration's "Startup America" initiative, which supports high growth entrepreneurship, is to foster innovation by increasing the rate of technology transfer and the economic and societal impact from Federal research and development (R&D) investments.  This will be accomplished by committing each executive department and agency (agency) that conducts R&D to improve the results from its technology transfer and commercialization activities.  The aim is to increase the successful outcomes of these activities significantly over the next 5 years, while simultaneously achieving excellence in our basic and mission focused research activities.

	I direct that the following actions be taken to establish goals and measure performance, streamline administrative processes, and facilitate local and regional partnerships in order to accelerate technology transfer and support private sector commercialization.

Sec. 2.  Establish Goals and Measure Progress.  Establishing performance goals, metrics, and evaluation methods, as well as implementing and tracking progress relative to those goals, is critical to improving the returns from Federal R&D investments.  Therefore, I direct that:

	(a)  Agencies with Federal laboratories shall develop plans that establish performance goals to increase the number and pace of effective technology transfer and commercialization activities in partnership with non federal entities, including private firms, research organizations, and non profit entities.  These plans shall cover the 5 year period from 2013 through 2017 and shall contain goals, metrics, and methods to evaluate progress relative to the performance goals.  These goals, metrics, and evaluation methods may vary by agency as appropriate to that agency's mission and types of research activities, and may include the number and quality of, among other things, invention disclosures, licenses issued on existing patents, Cooperative Research and Development Agreements (CRADAs), industry partnerships, new products, and successful self sustaining spinoff companies created for such products.  Within 180 days of the date of this memorandum, these plans shall be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) which, in consultation with the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) and the Department of Commerce, shall review and monitor implementation of the plans.

	(b)  The Interagency Workgroup on Technology Transfer, established pursuant to Executive Order 12591 of April 10, 1987, shall recommend to the Department of Commerce opportunities for improving technology transfer from Federal laboratories, including:  (i) current technology transfer programs and standards for assessing the effectiveness of these programs; (ii) new or creative approaches to technology transfer that might serve as model programs for Federal laboratories; (iii) criteria to assess the effectiveness and impact on the Nation's economy of planned or future technology transfer efforts; and (iv) an assessment of cooperative research and development venture programs.

	(c)  The Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with other agencies, including the National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, shall improve and expand, where appropriate, its collection of metrics in the Department of Commerce's annual technology transfer summary report, submitted pursuant to 15 U.S.C. 3710(g)(2).

	(d)  The heads of agencies with Federal laboratories are encouraged to include technology transfer efforts in overall laboratory evaluation.

Sec. 3.  Streamline the Federal Government's Technology Transfer and Commercialization Process.  Streamlining licensing procedures, improving public availability of federally owned inventions from across the Federal Government, and improving the executive branch's Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and Small Business Technology Transfer (SBTT) programs based on best practices will accelerate technology transfer from Federal laboratories and other facilities and spur entrepreneurship.  Some agencies have already implemented administrative changes to their SBIR and SBTT programs on a pilot basis and achieved significant results, such as reducing award times by 50 percent or more.  Over the past year, some agencies have also initiated pilot programs to streamline the SBIR award timeline and licensing process for small businesses.  In addition, some agencies have developed new short term exclusive license agreements for startups to facilitate licensing of inventions to small companies.  Therefore:

	(a)  Agencies with Federal laboratories shall review their licensing procedures and practices for establishing CRADAs with the goal of reducing the time required to license their technologies and establish CRADAs to the maximum practicable extent.

	(b)  The Federal Chief Information Officer and the Assistant to the President and Chief Technology Officer shall, in coordination with other agencies:  (i) list all publicly available federally owned inventions and, when available, licensing agreements on a public Government database; (ii) develop strategies to increase the usefulness and accessibility of this data, such as competitions, awards or prizes; and (iii) report their initial progress to OMB and OSTP within 180 days of the date of this memorandum.

	(c)  The heads of agencies participating in the SBIR and SBTT programs shall implement administrative practices that reduce the time from grant application to award by the maximum practicable extent; publish performance timelines to increase transparency and accountability; explore award flexibility to encourage high quality submissions; engage private sector scientists and engineers in reviewing grant proposals; encourage private sector co investment in SBIR grantees; partner with external organizations such as mentoring programs, university proof of concept centers, and regional innovation clusters; and track scientific and economic outcomes.  The OMB, OSTP, and the Small Business Administration shall work with agencies to facilitate, to the extent practicable, a common reporting of these performance measures.

Sec. 4.  Facilitate Commercialization through Local and Regional Partnerships.  Agencies must take steps to enhance successful technology innovation networks by fostering increased Federal laboratory engagement with external partners, including universities, industry consortia, economic development entities, and State and local governments.  Accordingly:

	(a)  I encourage agencies with Federal laboratories to collaborate, consistent with their missions and authorities, with external partners to share the expertise of Federal laboratories with businesses and to participate in regional technology innovation clusters that are in place across the country.

	(b)  I encourage agencies, where appropriate and in accordance with OMB Circular A 11, to use existing authorities, such as Enhanced Use Leasing or Facility Use Agreements, to locate applied research and business support programs, such as incubators and research parks, on or near Federal laboratories and other research facilities to further technology transfer and commercialization.

	(c)  I encourage agencies with Federal laboratories and other research facilities to engage in public-private partnerships in those technical areas of importance to the agency's mission with external partners to strengthen the commercialization activities in their local region.

Sec. 5.  General Provisions.  (a)  For purposes of this memorandum, the term "Federal laboratories" shall have the meaning set forth for that term in 15 U.S.C. 3703(4).

	(b)  This memorandum shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.

	(c)  Nothing in this memorandum shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect the functions of the Director of OMB relating to budgetary, administrative, and legislative proposals.

	(d)  Independent agencies are strongly encouraged to comply with this memorandum.

	(e)  This memorandum is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.

	BARACK OBAMA

	WASHINGTON, DC -- Today, the Obama Administration announced it is taking two important steps to help U.S businesses create jobs and strengthen their competitiveness in a global economy.  Through two Presidential Memoranda issued today, the Obama Administration will take steps to speed up the transfer of federal research and development from the laboratory to the marketplace, and it will create BusinessUSA, a one-stop, central online platform where small businesses and businesses of all sizes that want to begin or increase exporting can access information about available federal programs without having to waste time navigating the federal bureaucracy.  These announcements are part of a series of executive actions to put Americans back to work and strengthen the economy because we can’t wait for Congressional Republicans to act.

	“With too many families struggling and too many businesses fighting to keep their doors open, we can’t wait for Congress to take action,” President Obama said.  “Today, I am directing my Administration to take two important steps to help American businesses create new products, compete in a global economy, and create jobs here at home.”

Accelerating Products from the Science Lab to the Marketplace

	Breakthroughs in science and engineering create foundations for new industries, new companies, and new jobs.  With world-class universities and federal laboratories, the United States has long led the world in this innovative process.  As other countries begin to challenge American leadership in innovation, America must expand its ability to transfer science and engineering breakthroughs from the laboratory to the commercial marketplace.  Today’s Presidential Memorandum directs all federal agencies with research facilities to accelerate this timeline in three key ways:   


		It directs agencies to streamline and accelerate the process for private-public research partnerships, small business research and development grants, and university-startup collaborations.  This will result in grants to startups being made 50% faster. 

		It gives agencies more flexibility to partner with industry, encouraging them to create new partnerships with local communities, support the growth of regional innovation clusters, and share laboratory facilities with local businesses, among others. 

		It will institute more accountability by directing agencies to develop a five-year plan with concrete goals and metrics to measure progress, including keeping track of how many patents each lab is generating.


	Accelerating this timeline will help startups and small businesses around the country create new technologies, create new jobs and grow their companies while making more efficient use of the approximately $147 billion a year that the federal government invests in research and development.  Over the years, federal agencies have supported a number of startups that have gone on to define an industry. Each one of these companies, for example, received a federal research grant:


		Qualcomm, a global American telecommunication corporation that designs and manufactures wireless communications equipment.

		Symantec, a global software giant -- now the largest maker of security software for computers.

		The iRobot Corporation, which designs robots such as the Roomba, for home vacuuming, and the PackBot, for the US military.


Creating a Streamlined, Virtual One-Stop Shop to Help Businesses Grow and Hire

	Today, the Obama Administration is also following through on President Obama’s commitment to launch a centralized, one-stop online platform to make it easier than ever for businesses small and large to access services to help them grow and hire.  Today’s Presidential Memorandum directs the Administration to create within 90 days BusinessUSA, a one-stop shop for information regarding federal programs and services relevant to small businesses and businesses of all sizes that want to begin or increase exporting.
	 
	BusinessUSA will implement a “No Wrong Door” policy for small businesses and exporters by using technology to quickly connect businesses to the services and information relevant to them, regardless of where the information is located or which agency’s website, call center, or office they go to for help.  And the more federal agencies continue to add content to BusinessUSA to encompass the full range of business programs and services, the more we will be able to reduce the confusing array of websites that exist today.  To ensure that it is oriented towards the needs of the customer, BusinessUSA will be designed, tested, and built with the active feedback of U.S. businesses and relevant online communities and, to the extent possible, will integrate related state and local government services, as well as those of private sector partners.

	To strengthen America’s competitiveness in the global economy, we need to equip businesses with the tools and information necessary to support innovation and job growth in the 21st century.  Through BusinessUSA, small businesses and businesses who want to grow their exports will be able to find and access relevant programs, information, and other services from across the government rather than having to waste time navigating through the federal bureaucracy – thereby further streamlining and coordinating federal programs to reduce costs and provide customer-oriented service.  These changes were called for by the President’s Jobs Council, the President’s Export Council and small and medium sized businesses across the country as part of broad outreach by the Government Reorganization Initiative.
