
First Lady Michelle Obama Announced the Commitments to open or expand over 1,500 stores today

	The following retailers commented on First Lady Michelle Obama’s announcement today of their commitments to provide access to healthy, affordable food to millions of people in underserved communities.

SUPERVALU – Committed to building 250 new stores
	Craig Herkert, chief executive officer and president, SUPERVALU.  “We applaud the work the First Lady and the Partnership for a Healthier America are doing to raise awareness and to address the issue of childhood obesity and we are honored to be a part of the solution. I am very proud that our company and our associates are committed to growing our Save-A-Lot business, helping to bring healthier food options to underserved communities throughout the country, and truly making a difference in lives of Americans everywhere.”     

Walgreens – Committed to expanding their food offering to include whole fruits and vegetables, and other healthy options in approximately 1,000 stores
	Walgreens President and CEO Greg Wasson: "With more than 45 percent of our stores located in areas that don't have access to fresh food, Walgreens is uniquely positioned to bring more food options to Americans and also provide needed pharmacy, health and wellness services directly in those communities. Joining with the Partnership for a Healthier America, se plan to convert or open at least 1,000 food oasis stores across the country over the next five years.”

Walmart – Committed to opening or expanding 275 to 300 stores
	Leslie Dach, executive vice president of corporate affairs at Walmart: “By opening stores where customers need them most, Walmart will help build healthier families and stronger communities.  We believe every single person should have access to an abundant selection of fresh fruits and vegetables at an affordable price.  First Lady Michelle Obama is helping millions of Americans lead healthier lives, and Walmart is proud to partner with her in this work.  The First Lady’s leadership on products, prices and access to healthier food has helped sharpen our focus on bringing affordable groceries to underserved urban and rural areas.”  

California FreshWorks Fund – Secured $200 million to promote healthy food retailing in California
	Robert K Ross, M.D., president and CEO of The California Endowment: “Health happens in our neighborhoods. Families can’t eat healthier food if they can’t buy it where they live. The sheer number of banks and other investors involved proves that this is not only the right thing to do to improve the health of our communities, but it’s financially attractive. The more than a dozen partners who made it happen should be congratulated for their vision and collaboration.”

Brown’s SuperStore – Committed to building one new supermarket in Philadelphia and expanding one existing store in Chelthenham, PA
	Jeffrey Brown, President and CEO and Brown’s SuperStores: “It is incredible to see how the dedication and leadership of the First Lady is having such a significant impact on our children's future by enabling them to live longer and healthier lives as a result of this program.”

Calhouns Grocery – Committed to build 10 new stores in Alabama and Tennessee
	Gregory Calhoun, CEO/President of Calhoun Foods: “It is with great humility that I accept First Lady Michelle Obama’s invitation and challenge to help make sure everyone in this great country has access to healthy, affordable food.  When I look at the fact that millions of Americans live every day without access to nutritious foods, I know that it not just a commitment, but an obligation, to create opportunities for families in rural and urban areas of America.  Let’s Move! is a befitting name to get everyone moving in the right direction and over the next 5 years Calhoun Foods will open 10 stores in these underserved markets in Alabama and Tennessee.  Once again it is a great honor to be in a position to be able to provide jobs, healthy foods, and opportunities.  So I say “LET’S MOVE!”

Klein’s Family Markets – Committed to opening one new store in Baltimore, MD
	Marshall Klein, President and CEO of Klein’s Family Markets: “Access to fresh food has been a silent problem for years. It is one of the single largest factors determining family health and the Klein family is excited to be a part of the effort in helping to make a difference.”

	A fact sheet on today’s announcement is available at http://www.letsmove.gov/sites/letsmove.gov/files/Food_access_factsheet.pdf.
