Thank you.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you.  Thank you, everybody.  Thank you so much.  Please, please, everybody have a seat.  

	        I just want to, again, thank my extraordinary Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack for leading this forum.  (Applause.)  You don’t have a more passionate advocate for farming communities in rural America than Tom Vilsack.  And I will tell you, if you are not fully persuaded that this administration has been all over the rural agenda, spend five minutes with Tom Vilsack -- (laughter) -- and his enthusiasm for the steps that we’ve been taking just bubbles over.  And it’s been under his leadership more than anybody’s that we’ve been able to make such a difference.  

	        I want to thank all the members of my Cabinet who are here today as well.  They’ve done a terrific job participating in some of these breakout sessions.

	        As I said earlier, despite the hits that we’ve taken over the last two and a half years -- Tom is right, I am absolutely confident about our future.  And I’m confident because I know that while we face serious challenges -- and there’s no sugarcoating that -- there’s not a nation on Earth that would not want to trade places with us.  There’s nothing wrong with our country -- although there is some problems with our politics.  That’s what we need to fix.  That’s how we’re going to unlock the promise of America, and the incredible dynamism and creativity of our people.

	        And having a chance to meet with some of the men and women in this room have only made me feel more confident.  I’m excited about the future that you’re working towards each and every day.  And it ought to remind us of a simple lesson:  It’s always a mistake to bet against America.  (Applause.)  It’s always a mistake to bet against the American worker.  It’s always a mistake to bet against the American worker, the American farmer, the American small business owner, the American people.

	        And I know there are naysayers out there.  We know that there are some who see hard times and think that we’ve got to accept less; that our best days are past.  We know that there are people who think that for America to get ahead, small towns and rural communities have to be left behind.  You hear those sentiments.  But we also know that time and again those kinds of skeptics and that kind of pessimism has been proven wrong.

	        You look at the people in this room.  Look at what you’re achieving.  

	        I met with a group of small business owners, including a woman named Jan Heister, who started a small tooling and manufacturing company around twenty years ago.  Started off with nine people in a very small plant, and with the help of an SBA loan, she’s got a staff of more than 140 in a 160,000-square-foot factory.  Jan’s not messing around.  (Laughter.)  

	        This morning I had breakfast with somebody who has not only been interested in wind power because their family got involved in it 77 -- back in 1977, but are now -- have figured out a new technology to help locate where farm -- wind farms would ideally be located and have started a whole new business because they see the incredible potential of clean energy throughout this country.  

	        I saw some of these future farmers of America and their young president right over there, and when you hear the enthusiasm -- (applause) -- when you hear the enthusiasm and energy that these young people display, and the fact that if they can just get a little bit of a break when it comes to getting started on the front end, get a little bit of help with capital, that they are ready to take American agriculture to the next level -- it gives you confidence, it gives you hope.  

	        I joined a session with a group of entrepreneurs and ranchers and farmers and clean energy companies, and we were talking about all the ways in which folks right here in the heartland are pioneering new methods of raising crops and earning more off the land.  And we talked about the ways in which farmlands are helping our nation develop new forms of energy:  ranches where cattle graze next to solar panels; farms supplying crops for biofuels.  

	        I’ve got a former state senator here who’s helping farms manage manure in creative ways -- (laughter) -- in creative ways.  (Laughter.)  

	        So our task as a nation has to be to get behind what you’re doing; our task has to be making sure that nothing stands in your way, that we remove any obstacles to your success.  That’s why we’re doing more to connect rural America with broadband, and expanding small business loans, and investing in homegrown American energy.  That’s why forums like this are important, so that we hear directly from you about what you need and what you’re facing.  And what’s interesting is, in these conversations, one thing you notice -- in Washington, you’d think that the only two ways of thinking about our problems is either government is terrible and it has to be basically eliminated, or government is the answer to every problem.  But when you sit in some of these breakout sessions, I had no idea who was Democrat, who was Republican, who was independent.  What everybody understood was there are times when government can make a huge difference.  There are times where that SBA office or that USDA office can make all the difference in the world.  There are some boneheaded things the government is doing that need to be fixed.

	        And so it’s a very practical way of thinking about these problems.  It’s not either/or.  It’s a recognition that the prime driver of economic growth and jobs is going to be our people and the private sector and our businesses.  But you know what, government can help.  Government can make a difference.  

	        So I hope that I can count on you in the days ahead to lend your voice to this fight to strengthen our economy.  I need you to keep your pressure on your elected representatives for things like the payroll tax cuts or road construction funds or the other steps that will help to put our country back to work.  

	        That’s our great challenge.  It has been my central mission for the last two and a half years.  It has to be all of our central missions going forward.  That’s what ought to unite us as a country, regardless of party or ideology, because if we can do that -- if we can put country ahead of party -- I know that our future is bright.  I know that our best days are ahead of us.  

	        And Tom is absolutely right.  Not only do I continue to have absolute confidence in you, but you’re what gives me strength.  As I was driving down those little towns in my big bus -- (laughter) -- we slowed down, and I’m standing in the front and I’m waving, I’m seeing little kids with American flags, and grandparents in their lawn chairs, and folks outside a machine shop, and passing churches and cemeteries and corner stores and farms -- I’m reminded about why I wanted to get into public service in the first place.

	        Sometimes there are days in Washington that will drive you crazy.  But getting out of Washington and meeting all of you, and seeing how hard you’re working, how creative you are, how resourceful you are, how determined you are, that just makes me that much more determined to serve you as best I can as President of the United States.  

	        So thank you very much, everybody.  God bless you.  (Applause.)

Hello, hello, hello!  (Applause.)  Thank you.  Thank you very much.  Thank you.  Thank you.  Everybody please have a seat.  Thank you.  Thank you so much.  Thank you so much.

	        Well, it is wonderful to be back in Iowa, and thank you for arranging perfect weather these last couple of days.  (Laughter.)  I have just been having a great time.

	        I want to first of all make just a few acknowledgments.  Richard Avenarius, who is the mayor of Peosta, please -- where are you, Mr. Mayor?  Well, he was here.  (Laughter.)  Give him a round of applause anyway.  (Applause.)

	        This person I know is here, and I want to thank Northeast Iowa Community College for hosting us -- Dr. Liang Wee is here, interim president.  (Applause.)  

	        I’ve got a number of members of my Cabinet who are here.  All of them do outstanding work day in, day out.  So I couldn’t be prouder of them.  First of all, this guy you should be a little familiar with because he used to be the governor of this great state -- Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack.  (Applause.)  Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar.  (Applause.)  Secretary of Transportation Ray LaHood.  (Applause.)  Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Shaun Donovan.  (Applause.)  And the Small Business Administrator Karen Mills.  (Applause.)

	        Well, this is an outstanding crowd, and I don’t want to stand in the way of a lot of good work that’s going to be done, so I’m going to just make some brief remarks at the top.  We’ve got small business owners here.  We have farmers.  We have ranchers, public servants, clean energy entrepreneurs and community organizations from all across rural America.  And I’m here because I want to hear from you, and my Cabinet wants to hear from you.

	        There are two things that I know for sure:  America is going to come back from this recession stronger than before.  That I’m convinced of.  I believe that.  (Applause.)  And I’m also convinced that comeback isn’t going to be driven by Washington.  (Applause.)  It’s going to be -- it is going to be driven by folks here in Iowa.  It’s going to begin in the classrooms of community colleges like this one.  (Applause.)  It’s going to start on the ranchlands and farms of the Midwest, in the workshops of basement inventors, in the storefronts of small business owners.

	        And that’s why I’m here today.  Obviously we’re going through tough times right now; I don’t have to tell you that.  A lot of folks are looking for work.  Even if you have a job or a small business or a farm, you’re maybe getting by with fewer customers or making do with fewer shifts or less money in tips.  And for a lot of families in rural parts of the country, these challenges aren’t new.  For a long time -- a decade, maybe longer -- you’ve known what it means to face hardship.  

	        But we also know that while times may be tough, our people are tougher.  You know how to make it through a hard season.  You know how to look out for each other in the face of drought or tornadoes or disasters, looking out for each other until we reach a brighter day.

	        And that ethic, that kind of honor and self-discipline and integrity -- those are the values that we associate with small towns like this one.  Those are the values that built America.  And while we’ve taken some hits, this country still has the best workers, the greatest farms, the top scientists and universities, the most successful businesses and entrepreneurs in the world.  

	        So as I’ve been saying over the last couple days, there’s nothing wrong with this country; we’ll get through this moment of challenge.  The only question is if, as a nation, we’re going to do what it takes to grow this economy and put people back to work right now, and can we get our politics to match up with the decency of our people.  (Applause.)  

	        The question is if we’re going to harness the potential to create jobs and opportunities that exist here in Iowa and all across America.  We know what’s possible if we’re willing to fight for our future and to put aside the politics of the short term and try to get something done.  Already this administration has helped nearly 10,000 rural businesses and 35,000 small and medium-sized farms and ranches to get the financing that they need -- that’s already happened.  And that means a restaurant owner can bust down a wall and set up some more tables.  It means a family farm can buy a new piece of equipment to get more product to market.  And that puts people to work today.

	        Now, just as the interstate highways knitted the country together 50 years ago, we’ve also got to do some new things to meet the challenges of the 21st century.  We need to expand the reach of broadband, high-speed Internet, to 7 million more people and hundreds of thousands of businesses in rural communities.  And by taking that step, it’s making it possible for folks to take classes and train for new jobs online.  It’s helping people sell goods, not just down the street but across the country and around the world.  We’ve invested in clean energy, like advanced biofuels, so that we’re moving from an economy that runs on foreign oil to one that runs on homegrown America energy.  That’s a whole new industry that’s taking root here in Iowa and across rural America.

	        But the rural economy is still not as strong as it could be.  That’s why I created a Rural Council to look for ways to promote jobs and opportunity right now.  And this council has come up with a number of proposals, and we’re not wasting time in taking up these proposals; we want to put them to work right now.  

	        So today, I’m announcing that we’re ramping up our efforts to get capital to small businesses in rural areas.  We’re doubling the commitment we’ve already made through key small business lending programs.  We’re going to make it easier for people in rural areas looking for work to find out about companies that are hiring.  We're going to do more to speed the development of next-generation biofuels, and we’re going to promote renewable energy and conservation.  We’re going to help smaller local hospitals in communities like this one to recruit doctors and the nurses that they need.  And those are just some of the things that we’re already announcing today.  The reason we brought you all together is because I’m looking forward to hearing from you about what else we can do to jumpstart the economy here in rural America.

	        We want to leave no stone unturned when it comes to strengthening this economy.  And we’re going to be able to do a lot of stuff administratively.  All the proposals we’re making today didn’t require new laws; it just means that we’re doing things smarter, we’re eliminating duplication, we’re allocating resources to places that we know are really making a difference.

	        But we could do even more if Congress is willing to get in the game.  There are bipartisan ideas -– common-sense ideas –- that have traditionally been supported by Democrats and Republicans that will put more money in your pockets, that will put our people to work, that will allow us to deal with the legacy of debt that hangs over our economy.

	        I want to cut the payroll tax again to help families make ends meet.  That’s meant an extra $1,000 in the pockets of typical American families.  That means more customers for your business, more buyers of your products.  I want to pass a road construction bill to put tens of thousands of people to work all across America.  

	        We’ve got young people returning from Iraq and Afghanistan with incredible skills -– 25-year-olds who have led platoons; 26-year-olds handling equipment that costs hundreds of millions of dollars.  Well, let’s connect them to businesses that can use their talents right now.  

	        We should pass trade deals that will level the playing field for American companies.  And no folks benefit more than rural Americans when it comes to our trade.  That’s the reason that our agricultural sector is doing incredibly well, and that has spillover effects, ripple effects throughout the economy here.

	        But it also benefits manufacturing.  We’ve got folks in America driving Kias and Hyundais.  I want to see folks in Korea driving Fords and Chryslers and Chevys.  (Applause.)  I want to sell goods all over the world that are stamped with three words:  “Made in America.”  (Applause.)

	        And all of these proposals -- all of these proposals will make a difference for rural communities.  The only thing that is holding us back is our politics.  The only thing that’s preventing us from passing the bills I just mentioned is the refusal of a faction in Congress to put country ahead of party.  And that has to stop.  Our economy cannot afford it.  (Applause.)  Our economy can’t afford it.  

	        So I don’t care whether you’re a Democrat or Republican, independent, if you’re not registered with any party.  I want to enlist your help.  I need your help sending a message to Congress that it’s time to put the politics aside and get something done.
	        The folks here in Iowa do the right thing.  I’ve been traveling through these small towns and talking to folks, sitting down at diners.  And you listen to people, they take such pride doing the right thing -- taking care of their families, working hard, saving for the future, living within their means, giving back to their communities.

	        You do your part.  You meet your obligations.  Well, it’s time Washington acted as responsibly as you do every single day.  It’s past time.  (Applause.)  

	        We’ve got a lot of work to do, and the only way it will get done is if Democrats and Republicans put country ahead of party and put the next generation ahead of the next election.  And that’s what I’m fighting for.  That’s why I’m out here visiting communities like this one and Decorah, and small towns in Minnesota and Illinois.  

	        I’m convinced.  I’ve seen it.  When we come together, there’s no stopping this country.  (Applause.)  There is no stopping it.  

	        We can create opportunities for training and education and good careers in rural America so young people don’t feel like they’ve got to leave their hometowns to find work.  We can strengthen the middle class, restore that sense of economic security that’s been missing for a lot of people for way too long.  We can push through this period of economic hardship and we can get to a better place.  That’s why we’re here together.  That’s what this forum is all about.  

	        So I appreciate all of your participation.  I expect great ideas coming out of these breakout sessions.  I’m going to join a couple of them.  Let’s get to work.  Thank you very much.  (Applause.)

John, sorry to interrupt.  You were making a good point.  Good to see you.  Everybody, please have a seat.  I just wanted to jump in.  I just came out of a Small Business Breakout Session.  So I don’t want to interrupt.  I just want to emphasize, first of all, I think Vilsack is doing a great job.  (Applause.)

	        Second of all, this issue of energy innovation I think is absolutely vital for rural communities, but for the entire country.  If we can harness homegrown fuels -- whether it’s biofuels, wind, solar, geothermal, you name it -- then I think it can generate hundreds of thousands of jobs all across the country.  It can help free ourselves from dependence on foreign oil.  It diversifies sources of income for farmers.  I’m not telling you guys anything that you don’t already know.  

	        All I want to emphasize is, is that when you look at farm economies, right now obviously prices are good, but given the volatility of the world market, for us to be able to figure out how we can also use energy and conservation as an enhancement to the core business of feeding people, then I think that we can make enormous progress.  And Tom has a lot of creative ideas.  Our Department of Energy, we’ve made this one of our highest priorities.  And so I’m very interested in figuring out how the federal government can be even more helpful than it already is in moving this agenda forward.

	        So, with that, let me just sit back and listen and -- unless somebody has a question for me, then I’ll try to answer it.

 I think all I want to say by way of introduction is, I had the chance to have breakfast with a couple of your panelists here, and -- three of them, actually -- and I was just struck by the creativity and the stick-to-it-ness that so many businesses here are exhibiting.  

	        The good news, Karen, is all of them, uniformly, on a bipartisan basis, felt that the SBA, their local SBA office, is doing a great job and working really hard.  So there you go.  Just wanted you to know.  (Laughter.)  They were talking behind your back, and it was good.

	        At the same time, I think that there was a sense, in the conversation I had at breakfast this morning, that issues of credit are still a problem.  In particular, smaller businesses and startup businesses -- $100,000, $200,000 -- getting that initial startup capital oftentimes was a challenge.  

	        And we also heard that getting help on things like marketing could make a big difference for businesses that want to break out beyond their immediate communities, and -- particularly if they’re competing with larger businesses, even if they think they’ve got a better product.

	        So what I said to them is the same thing that I say to the entire group:  We genuinely believe that small business is the backbone of America.  It’s going to be the key for us to be able to put a lot of folks back to work.  What we’re looking for is, how can we do our jobs better?  How can the SBA or USDA or any of the other federal agencies that touch on rural America on a regular basis help you create the jobs and businesses and ideas that I think are so evident in a lot of communities all across the country.

	        We also heard, by the way, that there are a lot of young people, I think, who want to be more entrepreneurial.  And so are there ways that we can connect, for example, the community colleges -- but even beneath that, high schools -- to help young people think about how they go about organizing getting a business started.

	        So that’s my initial report from breakfast, and what I want to do is just hear from all of you.  And Karen will be taking copious notes, and she is somebody who I know is going to execute on any ideas that make sense.
