THE WHITE HOUSE
	Oficina del Secretario de Prensa
PARA PUBLICACIÓN INMEDIATA
	21 de febrero, 2012
No Podemos Esperar: el Gobierno de Obama anuncia medidas para impulsar la economía rural y promover la creación de empleos
WASHINGTON, DC - Como parte de las gestiones del Gobierno de Obama "No Podemos Esperar" para fortalecer la economía, crear empleos y apoyar el crecimiento empresarial, funcionarios del Gobierno anunciaron tres medidas importantes para ampliar la compra gubernamental de productos de base biológica, promover las actividades de creación  de empleos rurales regionales y desarrollar una fuerza laboral de atención médica rural, todo lo cual se basa en las inversiones históricas que el Gobierno ha hecho en las regiones rurales de los Estados Unidos en los últimos tres años. Los anuncios de hoy son los últimos de una serie de medidas ejecutivas que el Gobierno de Obama está tomando para fortalecer la economía y sacar al país adelante, porque no podemos esperar que el Congreso actúe.

	"Mi Gobierno está comprometido a utilizar todas las herramientas disponibles para promover el crecimiento económico y crear empleos de calidad en las zonas rurales de Estados Unidos", dijo el presidente Obama. "El anuncio de hoy refleja nuestro continuo enfoque en la expansión de oportunidades para los estadounidenses rurales y todos los estadounidenses, incluyendo el apoyo a empresas nuevas e innovadoras y el mejoramiento de la educación y la asistencia sanitaria en las regiones rurales. Y las medidas que estamos tomando hoy son posibles gracias a los comentarios y las ideas que he recibido de los estadounidenses trabajadores de las regiones rurales de los Estados Unidos, incluidos los participantes en el Foro Económico Rural de la Casa Blanca".

	"El presidente Obama entiende que una economía estadounidense fuerte está vinculada a una economía rural sana y vibrante", dijo el secretario de Agricultura, Tom Vilsack, quien preside el Consejo Rural de la Casa Blanca. "Las medidas que estamos tomando traerán nuevas inversiones económicas a nuestras comunidades rurales, para asegurar que las personas que viven en estas ciudades tengan un futuro mejor y más brillante."

	Los tres anuncios fueron recomendados por los organismos federales que participan en el Concilio Rural de la Casa Blanca, y aprovechan los programas y la financiación existentes,  pero las nuevas medidas acelerarán la creación de empleos en las zonas rurales del país.

	"Este Gobierno no estará satisfecho hasta que todos los que quieren un empleo, tengan un empleo, tanto en las comunidades rurales como urbanas", dijo el secretario de Comercio, John Bryson. "Los anuncios de hoy son sólo el último ejemplo de aliados federales que aúnan todos sus esfuerzos y recursos para ayudar a las empresas a crecer, crear empleos y asegurar que nuestra economía es construida para que perdure.”

	"La tecnología de la información de salud tiene el potencial de mejorar la calidad, el acceso y la eficiencia de la prestación de asistencia sanitaria, especialmente en las zonas rurales de nuestro país. Para lograr este objetivo, es esencial que contemos con una fuerza laboral calificada de TI de salud", dijo Mary Wakefield, PhD., enfermera titulada y administradora de la Administración de Recursos y Servicios de Salud. "Este memorando de entendimiento con nuestros colegas en el Departamento de Trabajo se basará en las colaboraciones existentes para ayudar a aliviar los problemas del aislamiento geográfico y de falta de personal que afrontan las comunidades rurales y ayudará a acercarnos a nuestro objetivo común de desarrollo de la fuerza laboral de TI de Salud."

	"Hay una necesidad real de ampliar la fuerza laboral rural de TI de salud y nuestro memorando de entendimiento con el Departamento de Salud y Servicios Humanos ayudará a asegurar que los programas de capacitación laboral aborden esta necesidad de forma rápida y eficaz", dijo la subsecretaria de Administración de Empleos y Capacitación Jane Oates.

Las nuevas iniciativas anunciadas hoy incluyen:


Promoción de una bioeconomía: el presidente Obama emitió un Memorando Presidencial hoy ordenando al Gobierno federal tomar medidas decisivas para aumentar drásticamente la compra de productos de base biológica en los próximos dos años, lo que creará puestos de trabajo e impulsará la innovación en donde se cultivan y fabrican productos de base biológica. El Memorando también se traducirá en un aumento del 50 por ciento en el número de nuevos productos que han sido designados como de base biológica. Entre los productos de base biológica se incluyen artículos tales como pinturas, jabones y detergentes y se desarrollan a partir de plantas agrícolas cultivadas, en lugar de productos químicos o bases de petróleo. El sector de productos de base biológica combina los dos motores económicos más importantes de las regiones rurales de Estados Unidos: la agricultura y la fabricación.



Acelerador de los Empleos Rurales: El Acelerador de los Empleos Rurales es un concurso nacional que proporcionará alrededor de US$ 15 millones para proyectos que promuevan la creación de empleos regionales impulsados por la innovación. El concurso combinará la financiación proveniente de la USDA, la Administración de Desarrollo Económico (EDA), la Autoridad Regional del Delta y la Comisión Regional de los Apalaches. Además, este enfoque requiere que múltiples organismos coordinen la asistencia técnica y programas de becas y préstamos de manera que los posibles clientes rurales tengan un único punto de acceso dentro del Gobierno federal para movilizar los recursos del Gobierno destinados a ayudar a una región del país. El Departamento de Agricultura de los Estados Unidos (USDA) utilizará el programa de Iniciativa de Desarrollo Comunitario Rural (RCDI) para apoyar este empeño y proporcionar asistencia técnica y fondos de capacitación a organizaciones intermediarias calificadas con el fin de que estas desarrollen su capacidad para emprender proyectos de vivienda,  instalaciones comunitarias y desarrollo económico y comunitario en las zonas rurales. La Oportunidad de Financiamiento Federal se dará a conocer en las próximas semanas.



		La Fuerza Laboral Rural de TI de Salud: el Departamento de Salud y Servicios Humanos y el Departamento de Trabajo firmaron un memorando de entendimiento para conectar los centros de educación popular y los colegios técnicos superiores que apoyan a las comunidades rurales con los materiales y recursos que necesitan para apoyar la capacitación de profesionales que trabajan en hospitales y clínicas rurales en Tecnología de la Información de Salud (HIT). La Oficina de Estadísticas Laborales estima que la fuerza laboral necesaria de HIT se incrementará en un 20 por ciento para el 2016.

En el último mes, el Gobierno de Obama ha hecho varios anuncios adicionales resultantes de las gestiones del Consejo Rural de la Casa Blanca, entre ellas una iniciativa para ayudar a los propietarios rurales a refinanciar sus hipotecas a tasas de interés más bajas y un nuevo marco de restauración de los bosques para impulsar el crecimiento económico y la creación de empleos mediante la restauración y la cosecha de madera. El nuevo plan encaminaría a los organismos federales hacia el aumento de las cosechas federales de madera a 3 mil millones de pies tablares.

	Desde agosto de 2011, el Consejo Rural de la Casa Blanca ha apoyado una amplia gama de iniciativas rurales, incluyendo un compromiso de US$ 350 millones en financiamiento por la Administración de la Pequeña Empresa (SBA) destinado a las pequeñas empresas rurales en los próximos 5 años, el lanzamiento de una serie de conferencias para conectar a los inversores con nuevas empresas rurales, la creación de equipos de marketing de capital para promover oportunidades de financiamiento federal para los inversionistas privados interesados ​​en realizar inversiones rurales, la disponibilidad de información para búsquedas de empleo en 2,800 oficinas locales del USDA en todo el país, la disponibilidad de préstamos del HHS para ayudar a más de 1,300 Hospitales de Acceso Crítico a contratar personal adicional, y la ayuda a los hospitales rurales para la compra de software y hardware con el fin de implementar la TI de salud. El USDA y la Marina también han anunciado una asociación para fomentar el uso de biocombustibles de nueva generación en las operaciones de la Marina.
MEMORANDUM FOR THE HEADS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES
SUBJECT: Driving Innovation and Creating Jobs in Rural America through Biobased and Sustainable Product Procurement
The BioPreferred program -- established by the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-171)(2002 Farm Bill), and strengthened by the Food, Conservation and Energy Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-234)(2008 Farm Bill) -- is intended to increase Federal procurement of biobased products to promote rural economic development, create new jobs, and provide new markets for farm commodities. Biobased and sustainable products help to increase our energy security and independence.
The Federal Government, with leadership from the Department of Agriculture (USDA), has made significant strides in implementing the BioPreferred program. It is one of the key elements in my efforts to promote sustainable acquisition throughout the Government under Executive Order 13514 of October 5, 2009 (Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance). Further efforts will drive innovation and economic growth and create jobs at marginal cost to the American public.
The goal of this memorandum is to ensure that executive departments and agencies (agencies) effectively execute Federal procurement requirements for biobased products, including those requirements identified in Executive Order 13514 and prescribed in the 2002 Farm Bill, as amended by the 2008 Farm Bill. It is vital that these efforts are in accord and carefully coordinated with other Federal procurement requirements.
Therefore, I direct that agencies take the following steps to significantly increase Federal procurement of biobased and other sustainable products.
Section 1. Actions Related to Executive Order 13514. (a) Agencies shall include and report on biobased acquisition as part of the sustainable acquisition goals and milestones in the Strategic Sustainability Performance Plan required by section 8 of Executive Order 13514.
(b) As required by section 2(h) of Executive Order 13514, agencies shall ensure that 95 percent of applicable new contract actions for products and services advance sustainable acquisition, including biobased acquisition, where such products and services meet agency performance requirements. In doing so, agencies shall:
(i) include acquisition of biobased products in their Affirmative Procurement Programs and Preferable Purchasing Programs, as applicable (as originally required by Executive Order 13101 of September 14, 1998 (Greening the Government Through Waste Prevention, Recycling, and Federal Acquisition) and reinforced by Executive Order 13423 of January 24, 2007 (Strengthening Federal Environmental, Energy, and Transportation Management) and Executive Order 13514);
(ii) include biobased products as part of their procurement review and monitoring program required by section 9002(a) of the 2008 Farm Bill, incorporating data collection and reporting requirements as part of their program evaluation; and
(iii) provide appropriate training on procurement of biobased products for all acquisition personnel including requirements and procurement staff.
(c) The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) shall emphasize biobased purchasing in the fiscal year 2012 and 2013 Sustainability/Energy scorecard, which is the periodic evaluation of agency performance on sustainable acquisition pursuant to section 4 of Executive Order 13514.
Sec. 2. Biobased Product Designations. The USDA has already designated 64 categories of biobased products for preferred Federal procurement. Although these categories represent an estimated 9,000 individual products, less than half of the known biobased products are currently included in the preference program. Increasing the number of products subject to the Federal procurement preference will increase procurement of biobased products. Therefore, I direct the Secretary of Agriculture to:
(a) increase both the number of categories of biobased products designated and individual products eligible for preferred purchasing by 50 percent within 1 year of the date of this memorandum; and
(b) establish a web-based process whereby biobased product manufacturers can request USDA to establish a new product category for designation. The USDA shall determine the merit of the request and, if the product category is deemed eligible, propose designation within 180 days of the request.
Sec. 3. Changes in Procurement Mechanisms. Several actions can be taken to facilitate improvement in and compliance with the requirements to purchase biobased products. To achieve these changes, I direct:
(a) the Senior Sustainability Officers and Chief Acquisition Officers of all agencies to randomly sample procurement actions (such as solicitations and awards) to verify that biobased considerations are included as appropriate. Agencies shall include results of these sampling efforts in the Sustainability/Energy scorecard reported to OMB;
(b) the Secretary of Agriculture to work with relevant officials in agencies that have electronic product procurement catalogs to identify and implement solutions to increase the visibility of biobased and other sustainable products;
(c) the Senior Sustainability Officers of all agencies that have established agency-specific product specifications, in coordination with any other appropriate officials, to review and revise all specifications under their control to assure that, wherever possible and appropriate, such specifications require the use of sustainable products, including USDA-designated biobased products, and that any language prohibiting the use of biobased products is removed. The review shall be on a 4-year cycle. Significant review should be completed within 1 year of the date of this memorandum, and the results of the reviews shall be annually reported to OMB and the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP); and
	 
(d) the Secretary of Agriculture to amend USDA's automated contract writing system, the Integrated Acquisition System, to serve as a model for biobased product procurement throughout the Federal Government by adding elements related to acquisition planning, evaluation factors for source selection, and specifications and requirements. Once completed, USDA shall share the model with all agencies and, as appropriate, assist any agency efforts to adopt similar mechanisms.
Sec. 4. Small Business Assistance. A majority of the biobased product manufacturers and vendors selling biobased products and services that use biobased products to the Federal Government are small businesses. To improve the ability of small businesses to sell these products and services to the Federal Government, I direct:
(a) the Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, to use relevant programs of the Department, such as the Manufacturing Extension Partnership network, to improve the performance and competitiveness of biobased product manufacturers;
(b) the Secretary of Agriculture to work cooperatively with Procurement Technical Assistance Center programs located across the Nation to provide training and assistance to biobased product companies to make these companies aware of the BioPreferred program and opportunities to sell biobased products to Federal, State, and local government agencies; and
(c) the Secretary of Agriculture to develop training within 6 months of the date of this memorandum for small businesses on the BioPreferred program and the opportunities it presents, and the Administrator of the Small Business Administration (SBA) to disseminate that training to Small Business Development Centers and feature it on the SBA website.
Sec. 5. Reporting. The Federal Government should obtain the most reliable information to gauge its progress in purchasing biobased products, including measuring the annual number of procurements that include direct purchase of biobased products, the annual number of construction and service contracts that include the purchase of biobased products, and the annual volume and type of biobased products the Federal Government purchases. I direct that:
(a) within 1 year of the date of this memorandum, the Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council shall propose an amendment to the Federal Acquisition Regulation to require reporting of biobased product purchases, to be made public on an annual basis; and
(b) following the promulgation of the proposed amendment referenced in subsection (a) of this section, the Secretary of Agriculture, in consultation with the Chief Acquisition Officers Council, shall develop a reporting template to facilitate the annual reporting requirement.
Sec. 6. Jobs Creation Research. Biobased products are creating jobs across America. These innovative products are creating new markets for agriculture and expanding opportunities in rural America. Therefore, I direct the Secretary of Agriculture to prepare a report on job creation and the economic impact associated with the biobased product industry to be submitted to the President through the Domestic Policy Council and OSTP within 2 years of the date of this memorandum. The study shall include:
(a) the number of American jobs originating from the biobased product industry annually over the last 10 years, including the job changes in specific sectors;
(b) the dollar value of the current domestic biobased products industry, including intermediates, feedstocks, and finished products, but excluding biofuels;
(c) a forecast for biobased job creation potential over the next 10 years;
(d) a forecast for growth in the biobased industry over the next 10 years; and
(e) jobs data for both biofuels and biobased products, but shall generate separate data for each category.
Sec. 7. Education and Outreach. In compliance with the 2002 Farm Bill, several agencies established agency promotion programs to support the biobased products procurement preference. The Federal Acquisition Institute has added biobased procurement training to its course offerings. To assure both formal and informal educational and outreach instruction on the BioPreferred program are in place and being implemented by each agency, I direct:
(a) the Secretary of Agriculture to update all existing USDA BioPreferred and related sustainable acquisition training materials within 1 year of the date of this memorandum;
(b) the Senior Sustainability Officers and Chief Acquisition Officers of agencies to work cooperatively with the Secretary of Agriculture to immediately implement such BioPreferred program agency education and outreach programs as are necessary to meet the requirements of this memorandum and relevant statutes; and
(c) the Secretary of Agriculture to work actively with the Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled to promote education and outreach to program, technical, and contracting personnel, and to purchase card holders on BioPreferred AbilityOne products.
Sec. 8. General Provisions. (a) This memorandum shall apply to an agency with respect to the activities, personnel, resources, and facilities of the agency that are located within the United States. The head of an agency may provide that this memorandum shall apply in whole or in part with respect to the activities, personnel, resources, and facilities of the agency that are not located within the United States, if the head of the agency determines that such application is in the interest of the United States.
(b) The head of an agency shall manage activities, personnel, resources, and facilities of the agency that are not located within the United States, and with respect to which the head of the agency has not made a determination under subsection (a) of this section, in a manner consistent with the policies set forth in this memorandum, to the extent the head of the agency determines practicable.
(c) For purposes of this memorandum, "biobased product" shall have the meaning set forth in section 8101(4) of title 7, United States Code.
(d) This memorandum is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
(e) The Secretary of Agriculture is hereby authorized and directed to publish this memorandum in the Federal Register.
BARACK OBAMA
WASHINGTON, DC – As part of the Obama Administration’s “We Can’t Wait” efforts to strengthen the economy, create jobs and support business growth, Administration officials announced three significant actions to expand the government’s purchase of biobased products, promote regional rural job creation efforts, and develop a rural healthcare workforce, all of which build on the historic investments the Administration has made in rural America over the past three years. Today’s announcements are the latest in a series of executive actions the Obama Administration is taking to strengthen the economy and move the country forward because we can’t wait for Congress to act. 
“My Administration is committed to using every tool available to promote economic growth and create good jobs in rural America,” said President Obama.  “Today’s announcements reflect our continued focus on expanding opportunity for rural Americans and all Americans, including supporting new and innovative businesses, and improving rural health care and education.  And the actions we’re taking today are possible thanks to the feedback and ideas I’ve received from hardworking Americans across rural America, including the participants at the White House Rural Economic Forum.”
“President Obama understands that a strong American economy is tied to a healthy, vibrant rural economy,” said Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack, who chairs the White House Rural Council. “The actions we are taking will bring new economic investments to our rural communities, to ensure the people who live in these towns have a better, brighter future.”
The three announcements were recommended by federal agencies participating in the White House Rural Council, and leverage existing programs and funding, but the new actions will expedite job creation in rural parts of the country. 
“This Administration will not be satisfied until everyone who wants a job, has a job – both in rural and urban communities,” said Commerce Secretary John Bryson.  “Today’s announcements are just the latest example of federal partners aligning all of their efforts and resources to help businesses grow, create jobs, and ensure that our economy is built to last.”
“Health information technology has the potential to improve the quality, access, and efficiency of health care delivery, especially in our nation's rural areas. To achieve this aim, it is essential that we have a skilled health IT workforce,” said Mary Wakefield, PhD., R.N., Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration. “This memorandum of understanding with our colleagues at the Department of Labor will build on existing collaborations to help ease the challenges of geographic isolation and staff shortages faced by rural communities and help move us toward our mutual goal of Health IT workforce development.”
“There is a real need to expand the rural health IT workforce and our MOU with the Department of Health and Human Services will help ensure that job training programs are quickly and effectively addressing this need,” said Assistant Secretary for Employment and Training Administration Jane Oates.
New initiatives being announced today include:
• Promoting A Bioeconomy:  President Obama issued a Presidential Memorandum today directing the Federal Government to take decisive steps to dramatically increase the purchase of biobased products over the next two years, which will create jobs and drive innovation where biobased products are grown and manufactured.  The Memorandum will also result in a 50 percent increase in the number of new products that are designated as biobased.  Biobased products include items like paints, soaps and detergents and are developed from farm grown plants, rather than chemicals or petroleum bases. The biobased products sector marries the two most important economic engines for rural America: agriculture and manufacturing. 
• Rural Jobs Accelerator: The Rural Jobs Accelerator is a national competition that will provide about $15 million for projects that promote innovation-fueled regional job creation.  The competition will combine funding from the USDA, the Economic Development Administration (EDA), Delta Regional Authority and the Appalachian Regional Commission.   Additionally, this approach will require multiple agencies to coordinate technical assistance and grant / loan programs so that potential rural customers have a single access point within the Federal government to mobilize the resources of the government to help a region of the country. USDA will utilize the Rural Community Development Initiative (RCDI) program to support this effort and provide technical assistance and training funds to qualified intermediary organizations to develop their capacity to undertake housing, community facilities, and community and economic development projects in rural areas.  The Federal Funding Opportunity will be released in the next few weeks.
• Rural Health IT Workforce:  The Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Labor signed a memorandum of understanding to connect  community colleges and technical colleges that support rural communities with the materials and resources they need to support the training of Health Information Technology (HIT) professionals that work in rural hospitals and clinics.  The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that the needed HIT workforce will increase by 20 percent by 2016. 
Over the last month, the Obama Administration has made several additional announcements resulting from the White House Rural Council’s efforts, including an initiative to help rural homeowners refinance their mortgages at lower interest rates and a new forest restoration framework to drive economic growth and job creation through timber restoration and harvest.  The new plan would place federal agencies on a path toward increasing federal timber harvests to 3 billion board feet. 
Since August 2011, the White House Rural Council has supported a broad spectrum of rural initiatives including a $350 million commitment in SBA funding to rural small businesses over the next 5 years,  launching a series of conferences to connect investors with rural start-ups, creating capital marketing teams to pitch federal funding opportunities to private investors interested in making rural investments, making job search information available at 2,800 local USDA offices nationwide, making HHS loans available to help more than 1,300 Critical Access Hospitals recruit additional staff, and helping rural hospitals purchase software and hardware to implement health IT. USDA and Navy also announced a partnership to advance the use of next generation biofuels in Navy operations.
