While the world has made significant strides in expanding opportunity for women and girls, continued inequalities remain, particularly in the areas of women’s political participation and economic opportunity. Growing bodies of evidence show that women’s political and economic empowerment are critical to fostering international peace and security, growing vibrant market economies, and supporting open and accountable governance. Recognizing these urgent concerns, President Obama issued a challenge at the United Nations General Assembly in September 2011 to address key barriers in these areas.
In response, the United States has come together with 12 other founding partner countries to launch the Equal Futures Partnership with the support of key multilateral partners including UN Women and the World Bank, as well as leading businesses and non-profit organizations.  Building on existing priorities of the Administration, the United States and its private sector collaborators are announcing new initiatives in response to the President’s call to action. 
OPENING DOORS TO QUALITY EDUCATION AND HIGH-PAYING CAREER OPPORTUNITIES IN SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING AND MATH
Women employed in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields earn on average 33 percent more than their non-STEM counterparts, but they represent only one-quarter of all workers in these sectors. As one way to address this disparity, the Administration intends to take new steps to expand workplace flexibility policies at select science and technology (S&T) agencies. Additionally, the U.S, in collaboration with private and non-profit stakeholders, is announcing a number of new steps, including:
	                                                                                                  
Improving data collection and dissemination: The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) intend to compile data on women’s participation in selected Federal S&T programs, including to identify any disparities.
	           
Building the skilled mentor pool: The Department of Energy will expand women in STEM mentoring efforts to office sites across the country, the National Science Foundation (NSF) will connect its scientists with opportunities to mentor girls, and the Environmental Protection Agency will work with organizations to encourage STEM mentoring for college women.
Harvey Mudd College and Piazza who launch WitsOn, a 6-week online program connecting students with leading female mentors from industry and academia  Additionally, Causecast, a technology firm offering online tools for corporate volunteering, will launch GIT Inspired!, a campaign supporting girls in technology.
Encouraging research-based STEM teaching: Discovery Education will announce the development of S☥EM POWER!, a program dedicated to tapping into girls’ passions, interests, and capabilities, while empowering them with the tools to succeed in STEM fields.
Broadening access to online/mobile STEM skills training: Connect2Compete, a nonprofit launched by the Federal Communications Commission, will expand outreach efforts to include specific collaboration with women & girl-serving groups. NASA and the U.S Geological Survey will each pursue new efforts to include natural disaster data in educational materials to highlight real world applications of STEM – an essential link for women and girls.
Finally, Creative Commons and the Open CourseWare Consortium will establish a task force to investigate the impact of STEM-related open educational resources on girls.
PROMOTING CIVIC EDUCATION AND PUBLIC LEADERSHIP FOR GIRLS
In the U.S, women are underrepresented at every level of government, from city halls to Congress.  To inspire girls to serve as leaders in our democracy, the Administration and private and non-profit sector leaders are announcing the following:
Promoting civic education and highlighting women in public leadership as role models: The White House and the Department of Education, working with the Center for American Women and Politics (CAWP), a unit of the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University, will further the Obama Administration’s efforts to support civic education opportunities for women and girls. CAWP will launch a new initiative featuring a speakers’ bureau of women elected and appointed officials, as well as online educational resources to help young people learn more about government and the roles women play as public leaders.  As part of its broader efforts to expand civic learning opportunities, the Administration intends to host a conference on civic education highlighting efforts like CAWP’s that promote civic engagement and will provide advice to CAWP as they establish this new project. 
Encouraging the development of digital tools that promote public leadership and civic education for girls:  The White House Council on Women and Girls is launching an app challenge to spur the development of web and mobile phone-based applications that inspire girls to serve as leaders in our democracy. 
Spurring research on girls and leadership: Dove plans to launch a new study on girls’ perceptions of leadership, building on its campaign to build girls’ self-esteem. 
BREAKING THE CYCLE OF VIOLENCE AND ENSURING ECONOMIC SECURITY FOR SURVIVORS OF VIOLENCE
Domestic violence has been estimated to cost our nation $8 billion a year in lost productivity and health care costs alone, and some studies have suggested that the full economic impact is much higher. Domestic violence and other forms of abuse can also stand in the way of women achieving economic independence. To address these challenges, the Administration announces the following efforts:
Ensuring fair workplaces for victims of abuse: As many as one-third of domestic violence survivors report losing their jobs as a result of domestic violence. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission's (EEOC) will coordinate with its field offices to provide training to state and territorial domestic violence coalitions on the application of federal employment discrimination laws to victims of domestic violence. 
Increasing financial capability for victims of abuse: The Departments of Treasury, HHS and Justice are working on collaborative efforts to assist victims with credit counseling, consumer rights, asset building and financial education.
New data on domestic violence and economic dependence: The Departments of Treasury and Justice will collaborate on a research agenda to examine the economic effects of violence in women’s lives and improve data collection in this area.
Breaking the cycle of violence by reaching young women: Bringing the public and private sectors together to intervene early in domestic violence can help young women secure a better future. To that end, we applaud the work of Mary Kay Inc., which will contribute 1 million dollars as the lead sponsor of loveisrespect.org’s “text for help” service – the nation’s first such program, designed to help young people with healthy dating and relationships.   Since September 2011, loveisrespect.org has responded to more than 30,000 texts and online requests for help.
EXPANDING SUPPORT FOR WOMEN ENTREPRENEURS
Investing in women entrepreneurs is an essential part of the President’s plan to create an economy built to last. Between 1997 and 2007, women-owned companies in the U.S grew at nearly twice the rate of all privately held U.S firms, adding roughly 500,000 jobs. Yet, many women entrepreneurs have difficulty accessing the tools, financing, and networks they need to start and grow their own businesses. The Administration is announcing new steps to further support women entrepreneurs, including:
Expanding entrepreneurship training opportunities for women veterans, youth, and women aged 50+:  In 2013, the Small Business Administration (SBA) intends to expand Operation Boots to Business to offer over 40,000 transitioning women service members the opportunity to access knowledge, tools, and resources needed to evaluate and succeed in entrepreneurship as they transition back into the civilian workforce. Additionally, Start Young   - a partnership between SBA and the Department of Labor, will provide young adults with fundamental knowledge about small business opportunities and resources available to promote economic self-sufficiency - will expand the number of cities in which it operates in. Finally, the Encore Entrepreneurship partnership between the SBA and AARP will give women the tools to start new ventures in midlife and beyond through targeted training materials that take into account their different financial needs and opportunities.
Promoting  women in innovation:  The Small Business Innovation and Research and Small Business Technology Transfer programs at SBA represent approximately $2.5 billion in federal funding of R&D specifically targeted to small businesses. Following a convening of key stakeholders later this year, Federal agencies will set goals to meaningfully increase the participation of women-owned small businesses and women principal investigators in these programs.
ADDITIONAL PRIVATE SECTOR COMMITMENTS:
To advance the goals of the Equal Futures Partnership, we are collaborating with multilateral stakeholders and the private sector to help countries strengthen and implement their efforts. In addition to the non-governmental initiatives described above, new private sector efforts also include:
Bringing together women and technology: Intel Corporation and Ashoka are partnering to inspire entrepreneurship and promote solutions that equip girls and women around the globe with innovative technologies. This partnership includes Intel’s sponsorship of Ashoka fellows and a Changemakers competition focused on women and girls in technology.
Intel Corporation is also partnering with the State Department to launch a new study focused on the gender and technology divide. The report is the first of its kind focused on assessing the gap in technology use, particularly the Internet, between women and men.
Closing the girls’ education gap abroad: Working to close the girls’ education gap in some of the world’s most under-resourced communities, Discovery Communications is creating educational video content with, for and about girls, as well as innovative teacher training.
Helping women entrepreneurs access new markets: Goldman Sachs 10,000 Women and WEConnect International are collaborating to ensure that successful women entrepreneurs are able to access new markets for sustained business growth.  Over the coming year, Goldman Sachs 10,000 Women and WEConnect will collaborate in India to develop and implement an online access to markets training designed for graduates of the 10,000 Women program.
Expanding Private Sector Efforts: The Clinton Global Initiative will work with CGI America participants to further the Equal Futures U.S domestic priority areas of entrepreneurship and STEM education through CGI’s Commitment to Action model.
“This week, the United States signed a new Declaration on Women’s Participation. Next year, we should each announce the steps we are taking to break down economic and political barriers that stand in the way of women and girls. That is what our commitment to human progress demands.”
President Obama’s Address to the United Nations General Assembly, September 21, 2011
The Challenge
	While the world has seen important progress in expanding opportunity for women and girls, significant gaps remain in the areas of political participation and economic opportunity. A growing body of evidence shows that women’s political and economic empowerment are critical to fostering international peace and security, growing vibrant market economies, and supporting open and accountable governance. Recognizing that no country can realize its potential if half its population cannot reach theirs, President Obama issued a challenge before the United Nations General Assembly in September 2011 to break down barriers to women’s political and economic empowerment.
Answering the Call
	In response to this challenge, on September 24, 2012, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton launched the Equal Futures Partnership on behalf of the United States along with 12 other founding members (Australia, Benin, Bangladesh, Denmark, Finland, Indonesia, Jordan, the Netherlands, Peru, Senegal, and Tunisia; as well as the European Union). Multilateral stakeholders including UN Women and the World Bank, and leading businesses and non-profit institutions also pledged support for the partnership.
The goal of the Equal Futures Partnership is for women to participate fully in public life and to lead and benefit from inclusive economic growth. Today, founding members are committing to new actions including legal, regulatory and policy reforms to advance this goal. Partners are also reaffirming at the highest levels of government their obligations and commitments to promote and protect women’s human rights and fundamental freedoms. Following the launch of this initiative, founding partners will continue consultations with their national stakeholders, including civil society, to translate commitments into action. In April 2013, we will reconvene at the World Bank Spring Meetings to share progress reports and welcome new member countries.
Commitments to Action
	As a founding member of the Equal Futures Partnership, the United States is making new commitments, building on existing efforts, including: 
Opening doors to quality education and high-paying career opportunities in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields: The Administration will embark on a new collaboration with private and non-profit stakeholders to reverse women’s historic underrepresentation in STEM education and careers.
Promoting civic education and public leadership for girls: In an effort to inspire girls to serve as leaders in our democracy, the Administration, along with leaders from the private and non-profit sectors, is announcing new efforts to highlight women in public leadership as role models, encourage research on girls and leadership, and spark the development of online tools to interest girls in becoming public leaders.
Ensuring economic security for survivors of violence: Federal agencies are launching new efforts to empower domestic violence survivors by helping them achieve financial independence through credit counseling, microfinance support, and education on financial literacy and employment rights.  
Strengthening support for women entrepreneurs: The Small Business Administration, along with other federal agency partners, will expand entrepreneurship training programs for women veterans, youth, and older women, as well as focus new efforts around encouraging women innovators.
In response to the President’s call to action, several leading U.S. businesses, academic institutions and non-profit organizations have also made commitments to advance women and girls’ economic and political empowerment at home and abroad.  They are dedicating themselves to launching new and innovative programs to support women and girls in STEM fields, connecting women entrepreneurs to markets and supply chains, and supporting research to advance girls’ leadership. These private sector supporters include: CauseCast, CGI America, Creative Commons, Discovery Communications, Dove, Goldman Sachs, Harvey Mudd College, Intel Corporation, Mary Kay Inc., OpenCourseWare Consortium, Piazza, and Rutgers University.
Read the full fact sheet on United States commitments 
Highlights from the commitments made by founding partners include:
Australia: Australia will work to improve women’s representation and leadership in male-dominated industries such as mining, utilities, and construction. Australia is also committing to achieve gender balance on Australian Government Boards by 2015 and establish a National Center of Excellence (NCE) to reduce sexual assault and family and domestic violence.
Bangladesh: Bangladesh will develop a National Action Plan to implement its 2011 Women Development Policy to ensure acceleration of women’s political, social and economic empowerment.  Bangladesh will expand its investments in women’s economic prosperity to the district and village level with the goal of achieving a workforce that is 50 percent women by 2021.  Bangladesh will also develop a National Action Plan on Violence Against Women to strengthen enforcement of its 2010 Domestic Violence Act.
Benin: Benin will seek to address laws, policies and regulations that restrict women’s participation in the economy and in public life, including reviewing and amending discriminatory nationality laws, as well as strengthening outreach around its current gender-based violence law. Benin will introduce a new electoral law to strengthen women’s candidacies and increase women’s political participation at all levels.
Denmark: Denmark will assess possibilities for improving the gender balance in Danish companies. Denmark will also implement new measures to reduce gender-based violence, focusing on increasing the awareness on violence in the family and capacity-building among municipal authorities and front line staff. In addition, Denmark will work to enhance political and civic participation of ethnic minority women in Denmark through mentorship programs and support for ethnic minority women’s entrepreneurship and businesses.  
European Union: The European Union will implement programs to advance women’s political participation and economic empowerment through targeted campaigns in countries in transition. As violence is one of the factors preventing women from political participation, the EU will commit to support initiatives against gender-based violence and femicide. The EU will also finance information campaigns on female genital mutilation in its Member States and support initiatives against this practice elsewhere in the world.
Finland: Finland commits to mainstream gender equality in its democracy and citizen participation policies, with a focus on ensuring women in immigrant communities can access economic opportunity.  Finland will also review the impact of tax policies and income transfers on economic equality, as well as prevent gender segregation and promote gender sensitivity in education and training.
Indonesia: In line with its strategic vision of sustainable growth with equity, Indonesia will begin new efforts to expand financial access and develop capacity for women in micro, small, and medium businesses, and will reform specific laws and policies to expand women’s equal economic opportunity. Indonesia will also implement new approaches to promote women in decision making positions in executive bodies and increase participation in legislative bodies.
Jordan: Jordan will set specific goals and undertake new efforts to advance participation in political life, particularly in decision-making positions, including in the judiciary, government and elected bodies. To address relatively low rates of women in the workforce, Jordan will work to increase the percentage of women workers, particularly university graduates, from 14.7% to 25% of the workforce, in the next three years.  
The Netherlands: The Netherlands will encourage employers to commit to increase their present ratio from 9% of women on boards of directors and supervisory boards to 30%. The Netherlands will set up programs to encourage more girls to choose technical education programs and more boys to go into the primary education sector. Internationally, the Netherlands is establishing a fund to strengthen the financial and organizational management of women’s organizations in the Middle East and North Africa.
Peru:  Peru will enhance women's participation in the political system by modifying election and political party laws to more effectively implement its quota system for female candidates and by working to give women more opportunities for political leadership.  Peru will also promote the financial inclusion of women through rural and urban financial education schemes, as well as through enhanced access to additional financial services and instruments for women using existing social programs.

Senegal:  Senegal will implement a comprehensive program to operationalize its gender parity law on women’s political participation in advance of local elections in 2014. This will include an initiative to build the capacity of women leaders, such as new members of Parliament, and facilitate citizen participation at the community level.
Tunisia: Tunisia reaffirms, in this crucial stage of building its republic, the principles of equality between the sexes and the fundamental rights of women and the rejection of all forms of discrimination. Tunisia will promote women's participation in public and political life and decision-making. Tunisia will also focus on the reactivation of the national strategy to combat violence in the family and against women.
Support from UN Women and the World Bank:
UN Women will work with the Equal Futures Partnership in the areas of economic and political empowerment and ending violence against women, through technical advice, knowledge and capacity development, facilitating and sharing of best practices, and supporting implementation of commitments at the country level. UN Women will also use its knowledge networks to disseminate experience coming from the Equal Futures Partnership, to benefit those working for gender equality and women’s empowerment.
The World Bank will work with Equal Futures partners to identify opportunities for collaboration to promote women’s rights in each country and support implementation of country commitments. To support the scaling up of Equal Futures activities, the World Bank will help synthesize lessons from the partnership, and disseminate them in a flagship report on Voice, Agency and Participation. Together with UN Women, the World Bank will also create and disseminate knowledge around the Equal Futures themes. The World Bank will host the next high-level Equal Futures meeting, planned for the Bank’s Washington, D.C. headquarters in April 2013.
Joining the Partnership
We welcome additional countries joining the Equal Futures Partnership. Government representatives and other interested stakeholders may email EqualFutures@state.gov for more information.
