
	 

	EXECUTIVE ORDER

	 

	IMPROVING ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES FOR VETERANS, SERVICE MEMBERS, AND MILITARY FAMILIES

	 

	By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, I hereby order as follows:

	 

Section 1.  Policy.  Since September 11, 2001, more than two million service members have deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan.  Long deployments and intense combat conditions require optimal support for the emotional and mental health needs of our service members and their families.  The need for mental health services will only increase in the coming years as the Nation deals with the effects of more than a decade of conflict.  Reiterating and expanding upon the commitment outlined in my Administration's 2011 report, entitled "Strengthening Our Military Families," we have an obligation to evaluate our progress and continue to build an integrated network of support capable of providing effective mental health services for veterans, service members, and their families.  Our public health approach must encompass the practices of disease prevention and the promotion of good health for all military populations throughout their lifespans, both within the health care systems of the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs and in local communities.  Our efforts also must focus on both outreach to veterans and their families and the provision of high quality mental health treatment to those in need.  Coordination between the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Defense during service members' transition to civilian life is essential to achieving these goals.

	 

	Ensuring that all veterans, service members (Active, Guard, and Reserve alike), and their families receive the support they deserve is a top priority for my Administration.  As part of our ongoing efforts to improve all facets of military mental health, this order directs the Secretaries of Defense, Health and Human Services, Education, Veterans Affairs, and Homeland Security to expand suicide prevention strategies and take steps to meet the current and future demand for mental health and substance abuse treatment services for veterans, service members, and their families.

	 

Sec. 2.  Suicide Prevention.  (a)  By December 31, 2012, the Department of Veterans Affairs, in continued collaboration with the Department of Health and Human Services, shall expand the capacity of the Veterans Crisis Line by 50 percent to ensure that veterans have timely access, including by telephone, text, or online chat, to qualified, caring responders who can help address immediate crises and direct veterans to appropriate care.  Further, the Department of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that any veteran identifying him or herself as being in crisis connects with a mental health professional or trained mental health worker within 24 hours.  The Department of Veterans Affairs also shall expand the number of mental health professionals who are available to see veterans beyond traditional business hours.

	 

	(b)  The Departments of Veterans Affairs and Defense shall jointly develop and implement a national suicide prevention campaign focused on connecting veterans and service members to mental health services.  This 12 month campaign, which shall begin on September 1, 2012, will focus on the positive benefits of seeking care and encourage veterans and service members to proactively reach out to support services.

	 

	(c)  To provide the best mental health and substance abuse prevention, education, and outreach support to our military and their family members, the Department of Defense shall review all of its existing mental health and substance abuse prevention, education, and outreach programs across the military services and the Defense Health Program to identify the key program areas that produce the greatest impact on quality and outcomes, and rank programs within each of these program areas using metrics that assess their effectiveness.  By the end of Fiscal Year 2014, existing program resources shall be realigned to ensure that highly ranked programs are implemented across all of the military services and less effective programs are replaced.

	 

Sec. 3.  Enhanced Partnerships Between the Department of Veterans Affairs and Community Providers.  (a)  Within 180 days of the date of this order, in those service areas where the Department of Veterans Affairs has faced challenges in hiring and placing mental health service providers and continues to have unfilled vacancies or long wait times, the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Health and Human Services shall establish pilot projects whereby the Department of Veterans Affairs contracts or develops formal arrangements with community based providers, such as community mental health clinics, community health centers, substance abuse treatment facilities, and rural health clinics, to test the effectiveness of community partnerships in helping to meet the mental health needs of veterans in a timely way.  Pilot sites shall ensure that consumers of community-based services continue to be integrated into the health care systems of the Department of Veterans Affairs.  No fewer than 15 pilot projects shall be established.

	 

	(b)  The Department of Veterans Affairs shall develop guidance for its medical centers and service networks that supports the use of community mental health services, including telehealth services and substance abuse services, where appropriate, to meet demand and facilitate access to care.  This guidance shall include recommendations that medical centers and service networks use community-based providers to help meet veterans' mental health needs where objective criteria, which the Department of Veterans Affairs shall define in the form of specific metrics, demonstrate such needs.  Such objective criteria should include estimates of wait-times for needed care that exceed established targets.

	 

	(c)  The Departments of Health and Human Services and Veterans Affairs shall develop a plan for a rural mental health recruitment initiative to promote opportunities for the Department of Veterans Affairs and rural communities to share mental health providers when demand is insufficient for either the Department of Veterans Affairs or the communities to independently support a full time provider.

	 

Sec. 4.  Expanded Department of Veterans Affairs Mental Health Services Staffing.  The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall, by December 31, 2013, hire and train 800 peer to peer counselors to empower veterans to support other veterans and help meet mental health care needs.  In addition, the Secretary shall continue to use all appropriate tools, including collaborative arrangements with community based providers, pay setting authorities, loan repayment and scholarships, and partnerships with health care workforce training programs to accomplish the Department of Veterans Affairs' goal of recruiting, hiring, and placing 1,600 mental health professionals by June 30, 2013.  The Department of Veterans Affairs also shall evaluate the reporting requirements associated with providing mental health services and reduce paperwork requirements where appropriate.  In addition, the Department of Veterans Affairs shall update its management performance evaluation system to link performance to meeting mental health service demand.

	 

Sec. 5.  Improved Research and Development.  (a)  The lack of full understanding of the underlying mechanisms of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), other mental health conditions, and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) has hampered progress in prevention, diagnosis, and treatment.  In order to improve the coordination of agency research into these conditions and reduce the number of affected men and women through better prevention, diagnosis, and treatment, the Departments of Defense, Veterans Affairs, Health and Human Services, and Education, in coordination with the Office of Science and Technology Policy, shall establish a National Research Action Plan within 8 months of the date of this order.

	 

	(b)  The National Research Action Plan shall include strategies to establish surrogate and clinically actionable biomarkers for early diagnosis and treatment effectiveness; develop improved diagnostic criteria for TBI; enhance our understanding of the mechanisms responsible for PTSD, related injuries, and neurological disorders following TBI; foster development of new treatments for these conditions based on a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms; improve data sharing between agencies and academic and industry researchers to accelerate progress and reduce redundant efforts without compromising privacy; and make better use of electronic health records to gain insight into the risk and mitigation of PTSD, TBI, and related injuries.  In addition, the National Research Action Plan shall include strategies to support collaborative research to address suicide prevention.

	 

	(c)  The Departments of Defense and Health and Human Services shall engage in a comprehensive longitudinal mental health study with an emphasis on PTSD, TBI, and related injuries to develop better prevention, diagnosis, and treatment options.  Agencies shall continue ongoing collaborative research efforts, with an aim to enroll at least 100,000 service members by December 31, 2012, and include a plan for long term follow up with enrollees through a coordinated effort with the Department of Veterans Affairs.

	 

Sec. 6.  Military and Veterans Mental Health Interagency Task Force.  There is established an Interagency Task Force on Military and Veterans Mental Health (Task Force), to be co chaired by the Secretaries of Defense, Veterans Affairs, and Health and Human Services, or their designated representatives.

	 

	(a)  Membership.  In addition to the Co-Chairs, the Task Force shall consist of representatives from:

	 

	(i)    the Department of Education;

	 

	(ii)   the Office of Management and Budget;

	 

	(iii)  the Domestic Policy Council;

	 

	(iv)   the National Security Staff;

	 

	(v)    the Office of Science and Technology Policy;

	 

	(vi)   the Office of National Drug Control Policy; and

	 

	(vii)  such other executive departments, agencies, or offices as the Co-Chairs may designate.

	 

	A member agency of the Task Force shall designate a full time officer or employee of the Federal Government to perform the Task Force functions.

	 

	(b)  Mission.  Member agencies shall review relevant statutes, policies, and agency training and guidance to identify reforms and take actions that facilitate implementation of the strategies outlined in this order.  Member agencies shall work collaboratively on these strategies and also create an inventory of mental health and substance abuse programs and activities to inform this work.

	 

	(c)  Functions.

	 

	(i)    Not later than 180 days after the date of this order, the Task Force shall submit recommendations to the President on strategies to improve mental health and substance abuse treatment services for veterans, service members, and their families.  Every year thereafter, the Task Force shall provide to the President a review of agency actions to enhance mental health and substance abuse treatment services for veterans, service members, and their families consistent with this order, as well as provide additional recommendations for action as appropriate.  The Task Force shall define specific goals and metrics that will aid in measuring progress in improving mental health strategies.  The Task Force will include cost analysis in the development of all recommendations, and will ensure any new requirements are supported within existing resources.

	 

	(ii)   In addition to coordinating and reviewing agency efforts to enhance veteran and military mental health services pursuant to this order, the Task Force shall evaluate:

	 

	(1)  agency efforts to improve care quality and ensure that the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs and community based mental health providers are trained in the most current evidence based methodologies for treating PTSD, TBI, depression, related mental health conditions, and substance abuse;

	 

	(2)  agency efforts to improve awareness and reduce stigma for those needing to seek care; and

	 

	(3)  agency research efforts to improve the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of TBI, PTSD, and related injuries, and explore the need for an external research portfolio review.

	 

	(iii)  In performing its functions, the Task Force shall consult with relevant nongovernmental experts and organizations as necessary.

	 

Sec. 7.  General Provisions.  (a)  This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.

	 

	(b)  Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:

	 

	(i)   the authority granted by law to an executive department or agency, or the head thereof; or

	 

	(ii)  the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budgetary, administrative, or legislative proposals.

	 

	(c)  This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	 

	THE WHITE HOUSE,

	August 31, 2012.

	 

	NATIONAL CHILDHOOD CANCER AWARENESS MONTH, 2012

	 

	BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

	 

	A PROCLAMATION

	 

	Every year, thousands of children across America are diagnosed with cancer    an often life threatening illness that remains the leading cause of death by disease for children under the age of 15.  The causes of pediatric cancer are still largely unknown, and though new discoveries are resulting in new treatments, this heartbreaking disease continues to scar families and communities in ways that may never fully heal.  This month, we remember the young lives taken too soon, stand with the families facing childhood cancer today, and rededicate ourselves to combating this terrible illness.

	 

	While much remains to be done, our Nation has come far in the fight to understand, treat, and control childhood cancer.  Thanks to ongoing advances in research and treatment, the 5 year survival rate for all childhood cancers has climbed from less than 50 percent to 80 percent over the past several decades.  Researchers around the world continue to pioneer new therapies and explore the root causes of the disease, driving progress that could reveal cures or improved outcomes for patients.  But despite the gains we have made, help still does not come soon enough for many of our sons and daughters, and too many families suffer pain and devastating loss.

	 

	My Administration will continue to support families battling pediatric cancer and work to ease the burdens they face.  Under the Affordable Care Act, insurance companies can no longer deny health coverage to children because of pre existing conditions, including cancer, nor can they drop coverage because a child is diagnosed with cancer.  The law also bans insurers from placing a lifetime dollar limit on the amount of coverage they provide, giving families peace of mind that their coverage will be there when they need it most.  And as we work to ensure all Americans have access to affordable health care, my Administration will continue to invest in the cutting edge cancer research that paves the way for tomorrow's breakthroughs.

	 

	This month, we pay tribute to the families, friends, professionals, and communities who lend their strength to children fighting pediatric cancer.  May their courage and commitment continue to move us toward new cures, healthier outcomes, and a brighter future for America's youth.

	 

	NOW, THEREFORE, I, BARACK OBAMA, President of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, do hereby proclaim September 2012 as National Childhood Cancer Awareness Month.  I encourage all Americans to join me in reaffirming our commitment to fighting childhood cancer.

	 

	IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this thirty first day of August, in the year of our Lord two thousand twelve, and of the Independence of the United States of America the two hundred and thirty-seventh.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	 

	NATIONAL OVARIAN CANCER AWARENESS MONTH, 2012

	 

	BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

	 

	A PROCLAMATION

	 

	This year, thousands of American women will lose their lives to ovarian cancer.  They are mothers and daughters, sisters and grandmothers, community members and cherished friends -- and the absence they leave in our hearts will be deeply felt forever.  During National Ovarian Cancer Awareness Month, we honor those we have lost, show our support for women who bravely carry on the fight, and take action to lessen the tragic toll ovarian cancer takes on families across our Nation.

	 

	Sadly, women are all too often diagnosed with this disease when it has already reached an advanced stage.  Because early detection is the best defense against ovarian cancer, it is essential that women know the risk factors associated with the disease.  Women who are middle-aged or older, who have a family history of ovarian or breast cancer, or who have had certain cancers in the past are at increased risk of developing ovarian cancer.  Any woman who thinks she is at risk of ovarian cancer    or who experiences symptoms, including abdominal pain, pressure, or swelling -- should talk with her health care provider.  To learn more, visit www.Cancer.gov.

	 

	Ongoing progress in science and medicine is moving us forward in the battle against ovarian cancer, and my Administration remains committed to improving outcomes for women suffering from this devastating illness.  Through agencies across the Federal Government, we are continuing to invest in research that paves the way for a new generation of tests and treatments.  Through the Centers for Disease Control's Inside Knowledge campaign, we are working to raise awareness about the signs and symptoms of ovarian cancer.  The Affordable Care Act already bans insurance companies from dropping a woman's coverage because she has ovarian cancer, and from placing lifetime or restrictive annual dollar limits on her coverage.  Beginning in 2014, the law will also prohibit insurers from denying coverage or charging higher premiums because a woman has ovarian cancer -- or any other pre-existing condition.

	 

	Ovarian cancer affects the lives of far too many women every year, and the tragedy it leaves in its wake reverberates in communities across our country.  This month, we stand with all those who have known the pain of ovarian cancer, and we rededicate ourselves to the pursuit of new and better ways to prevent, detect, and treat this devastating disease.

	 

	NOW, THEREFORE, I, BARACK OBAMA, President of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, do hereby proclaim September 2012 as National Ovarian Cancer Awareness Month.  I call upon citizens, government agencies, organizations, health care providers, and research institutions to raise ovarian cancer awareness and continue helping Americans live longer, healthier lives.  I also urge women across our country to talk to their health care providers and learn more about this disease.

	 

	IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this thirty first day of August, in the year of our Lord two thousand twelve, and of the Independence of the United States of America the two hundred and thirty-seventh.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	 

	NATIONAL PROSTATE CANCER AWARENESS MONTH, 2012

	 

	BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

	 

	A PROCLAMATION

	 

	Prostate cancer is among the most common cancers for men living in the United States, and despite the progress we have made in controlling it, the disease continues to take a devastating toll on thousands of lives every year.  During National Prostate Cancer Awareness Month, we remember those we have lost to prostate cancer, and we renew our commitment to preventing, detecting, and treating this terrible illness.

	 

	While the causes of prostate cancer are still unknown, men with certain risk factors may be more likely to develop the disease.  Most men who suffer from prostate cancer are over the age of 65; those whose fathers, brothers, or sons have had prostate cancer are also at greater risk.  Prostate cancer is especially prevalent among African American men, who experience both the highest incidence and the highest mortality rates of prostate cancer.  I encourage all men to visit www.Cancer.gov to learn the warning signs of this disease.

	 

	My Administration will continue to stand with men and their families in the fight against prostate cancer.  To ensure patients are covered when they need it most, the Affordable Care Act prevents insurers from placing lifetime or restrictive annual dollar limits on essential health benefits and from dropping coverage when people get sick.  Beginning in 2014, the Act will also help Americans get the services they need by prohibiting insurance companies from discriminating against people with pre existing conditions.  And to advance the state of care for men with prostate cancer, my Administration will continue to support promising research that brings us closer to tomorrow's groundbreaking therapies, treatments, and prevention techniques.

	 

	Too many men will develop prostate cancer during their lifetimes.  As we mark National Prostate Cancer Awareness Month, let us support the families who fight alongside them, pay tribute to the professionals who pursue the highest standards of care, and rededicate ourselves to improving outcomes for prostate cancer patients across our country.

	 

	NOW, THEREFORE, I, BARACK OBAMA, President of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, do hereby proclaim September 2012 as National Prostate Cancer Awareness Month.  I encourage all citizens, government agencies, private businesses, nonprofit organizations, and other groups to join in activities that will increase awareness and prevention of prostate cancer.

	 

	IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this thirty first day of August, in the year of our Lord two thousand twelve, and of the Independence of the United States of America the two hundred and thirty-seventh.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA
