“Unto them I will give my house and within my walls a memorial and a name…an everlasting name that shall not be cut off.”
	 
	President Peres, Prime Minister Netanyahu, Chairman Shalev, Rabbi Lau -- thank you for sharing this house, this memorial, with me today.  And thank you to the people of Israel for preserving the names of the millions taken from us, of blessed memory -- names that shall never be forgotten.
	 
	This is my second visit to this living memorial.  Since then, I’ve walked among the barbed wire and guard towers of Buchenwald.  Rabbi Lau told me of his time there, and we reminisced about our good friend, Elie Wiesel, and the memories that he shared with me.  I have stood in the old Warsaw ghetto, with survivors who would not go quietly.  But nothing equals the wrenching power of this sacred place, where the totality of the Shoah is told.  We could come here a thousand times, and each time our hearts would break.
	 
	For here we see the depravity to which man can sink; the barbarism that unfolds when we begin to see our fellow human beings as somehow less than us, less worthy of dignity and of life.  We see how evil can, for a moment in time, triumph when good people do nothing, and how silence abetted a crime unique in human history.
	 
	Here we see their faces and we hear their voices.  We look upon the objects of their lives -- the art that they created, the prayer books that they carried.  We see that even as they had hate etched into their arms, they were not numbers.  They were men and women and children -- so many children -- sent to their deaths because of who they were, how they prayed, or who they loved.
	 
	And yet, here, alongside man’s capacity for evil, we also are reminded of man’s capacity for good -- the rescuers, the Righteous Among the Nations who refused to be bystanders.  And in their noble acts of courage, we see how this place, this accounting of horror, is, in the end, a source of hope.
For here we learn that we are never powerless.  In our lives we always have choices.  To succumb to our worst instincts or to summon the better angels of our nature.  To be indifferent to suffering to wherever it may be, whoever it may be visited upon, or to display the empathy that is at the core of our humanity.  We have the choice to acquiesce to evil or make real our solemn vow -- “never again.”  We have the choice to ignore what happens to others, or to act on behalf of others and to continually examine in ourselves whatever dark places there may be that might lead to such actions or inactions.  This is our obligation -- not simply to bear witness, but to act.
	 
	For us, in our time, this means confronting bigotry and hatred in all of its forms, racism, especially anti-Semitism.  None of that has a place in the civilized world -- not in the classrooms of children; not in the corridors of power.  And let us never forget the link between the two.  For our sons and daughters are not born to hate, they are taught to hate.  So let us fill their young hearts with the same understanding and compassion that we hope others have for them.  
	 
	Here we hope.  Because after you walk through these halls, after you pass through the darkness, there is light -- a glorious view of the Jerusalem Forest, with the sun shining over the historic homeland of the Jewish people; a fulfillment of the prophecy: “you shall live again…upon your own soil.”  Here, on your ancient land, let it be said for all the world to hear:  The State of Israel does not exist because of the Holocaust.  But with the survival of a strong Jewish State of Israel, such a Holocaust will never happen again. 
	 
	Here we pray that we all can be better; that we can all grow, like the sapling near the Children’s Memorial -- a sapling from a chestnut tree that Anne Frank could see from her window.  The last time she described it in her diary, she wrote: “Our chestnut tree is in full bloom.  It’s covered with leaves and is even more beautiful than last year.”  That’s a reminder of who we can be.  But we have to work for it.  We have to work for it here in Israel.  We have to work for it in America.  We have to work for it around the world -- to tend the light and the brightness as opposed to our worst instincts.
	 
	So may God bless the memory of the millions.  May their souls be bound up in the bond of eternal life.  And may each spring bring a full bloom even more beautiful than the last. 
	 
Thank you very much. 
Well, it’s a great pleasure to be back in Jordan.  I’m grateful to my good friend, His Majesty King Abdullah.  Thank you for your kind words.  Thank you to the Jordanian people for the extraordinary warmth and hospitality that I remembered well from my first visit as a senator.
The thing I mainly remember when I came here was that His Majesty was kind enough to personally drive me to the airport.  I won’t tell you how fast he was going, but Secret Service I don't think could keep up.  (Laughter.)  So, nevertheless, we're very much appreciative for you welcoming me and my delegation.
The reason I'm here is simple.  Jordan is an invaluable ally.  It is a great friend.  We've been working together since the early years of the Kingdom under His Majesty’s great-grandfather, King Adbullah I, who gave his life in the name of peace.  Today, our partnership in development, education, health, science, technology, improve the lives of our peoples.  Our close security cooperation helps keep your citizens and ours safe from terrorism.  Your military and police help train other security forces from the Palestinian Authority to Yemen. 
And I’m especially grateful to His Majesty, who, like his father -- memorialized by the mosque I saw when I arrived -- is a force for peace in word and in deed.  You’ve invested deeply and personally in strengthening the ties between our countries.  That's why you were the first Arab leader I welcomed to the Oval Office when I became President.  And I very much appreciate the work we’ve done together on a broad range of challenges.  So I’ve come to Jordan to build on what is already a very strong foundation and to deepen what is already extraordinary cooperation.
As His Majesty mentioned, today was a chance for me to hear from him about the necessary political reforms that are underway here.  And I want to commend the people of Jordan on this year’s parliamentary elections, which represented a positive step toward a more transparent and credible and inclusive political process. I appreciated hearing His Majesty’s plans for a parliamentary government that responds to the aspirations of the Jordanian people, and I very much welcome his commitment to active citizenship where citizens play a larger role in the future of this nation. 
At a time of so much change and tumult across the region, I think His Majesty recognizes Jordan has a great opportunity to show the benefits of genuine and peaceful reform, including stronger political parties and good governance and transparency
	-- all of which makes government more effective and makes sure that the people feel a connection to their government. 
Your Majesty, you've been a driving force for these efforts, and you can be assured that the United States will continue to work with you and Prime Minister Ensour as you build on this progress. 
We also discussed the economic progress that has to come with political progress.  The Jordanian government is working hard to manage its current budget challenges.  I think His Majesty outlined the enormous pressures that Jordan is experiencing, often not because of any factors internal, but rather a range of external factors as well.  And I recognize that while the economic reforms are difficult, they are essential over the long term to creating the kind of growth and opportunity and dynamism in the economy that will help the Jordanian people achieve their dreams.  So we want you to succeed. 
So my administration is, therefore, working with Congress to provide loan guarantees to Jordan this year.  Together, I believe we can help deliver the results that Jordanians deserve -- to see their schools better, their roads improved, health care, clean water all enhanced; the training that I know a lot of Jordanians seek, particularly young people, to get a job or to turn entrepreneurial skills into a business that creates even more jobs. 
And I was proud to welcome some young Jordanians to the Entrepreneurship Summit that I hosted back in Washington.  And we’re going to continue to focus on creating economic opportunities, because the people here in Jordan deserve the same opportunities as people everywhere.
We spent a good deal of time on regional challenges.  And I updated His Majesty on my discussions with Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas.  As I said in my speech yesterday, I believe there are steps that both sides can take to build confidence and trust, and move a serious negotiation forward.  We're not there yet, but I'm confident that it can happen -- in part, because it must happen.  It will be good for the Israelis and it will be good for the Palestinians. 
I’m very grateful for His Majesty’s readiness to advance these efforts.  As has been true in the past, His Majesty and Jordan will be critical to making progress towards a just and lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
And we spent a significant amount of time consulting on Syria.  I want to commend His Majesty for his leadership, and I want to commend the Jordanian people for their compassion during an extraordinarily difficult time for their neighbors.  His Majesty was the first Arab leader to publicly call on Assad to step down because of the horrific violence that was being inflicted on the Syrian people.  Jordan has played a leading role in trying to begin a political transition toward a new government.  We're working together to strengthen a credible Syrian opposition. 
We share Jordan’s concerns about violence spilling across the border, so I want to take this opportunity to make it clear the United States is committed to the security of Jordan, which is backed by our strong alliance.
As has been mentioned, during this crisis the Jordanian people have displayed extraordinary generosity, but the strains of so many refugees, inevitably, is showing.  Every day Jordanians are extending a hand of support to neighbors far from home, but this is a heavy burden.  And the international community needs to step up to make sure that they are helping to shoulder this burden. 
The United States will certainly do our part.  We are already the single largest donor of humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people.  Some of this has helped people here in Jordan, and today I'm announcing that my administration will work with Congress to provide Jordan with an additional $200 million in budget support this year, as it cares for Syrian refugees and Jordanian communities affected by this crisis.
This will mean more humanitarian assistance in basic services, including education for Syrian children so far from home whose lives have been upended.  And I think, as parents, we can only imagine how heartbreaking that must be for any parent to see their children having to go through the kinds of tumult that they’re experiencing.
Our cooperation on Syria is an example of how the partnership between the United States and Jordan improves the lives not only of the Jordanian people, but peoples across the region.
So, again, Your Majesty, I want to express my great appreciation for our partnership.  I want to thank you and the Jordanian people for the friendship and hospitality that they’ve shown me and to my fellow Americans.  And just as I visited the Citadel here in Amman on my last visit, I'm looking forward to seeing Petra tomorrow -- weather permitting -- one of the great wonders of history that the world can experience, thanks to the care and dedication of Jordan and its people.
Shukran.  Thank you.
Since the start of the situation in Syria, we have stepped up, as not just a superpower, as you phrased it, but also because of basic humanity, to say that Assad needed to go.  We haven’t just led with words, but we’ve also led with deeds.  As I indicated, we're the single largest humanitarian donor to the Syrian people.  We have worked diligently in cooperation with the international community to help organize and mobilize a political opposition that is credible -- because in the absence of a credible political opposition, it will be impossible for us to transition to a more peaceful and more representative and legitimate government structure inside of Syria. 
And that’s an area where we have been involved on almost a daily basis.  First, Secretary Hillary Clinton helped to spearhead the efforts that formed a coherent Syrian Opposition Council.  Now you’ve got Secretary Kerry, who’s deeply involved in that effort as well.  And we are providing not just advice, not just words, but we’re providing resources, training, capacity, in order for that political opposition to maintain links within Syria and to be able to provide direct services to people inside of Syria, including the kinds of relief efforts that obviously we’re seeing here in Jordan, but there are a whole bunch of people who are internally displaced inside of Syria who need help.
I think that what your question may be suggesting is why haven’t we simply gone in militarily?  And I think it’s fair to say that the United States often finds itself in a situation where if it goes in militarily, then it’s criticized for going in militarily; and if doesn’t go in militarily, then people say, why aren’t you doing something militarily? 
And my response at this stage is to make sure that what we do contributes to bringing an end to the bloodshed as quickly as possible.  And working in a multilateral context, in an international context, because we think our experience shows that when we lead but we are also working with others -- like the Jordanians, like the Turks, like other interested parties in the region -- then the outcomes are better.  When we are working with the Syrians themselves, so that this is not externally imposed, but rather something that is linked directly with the aspirations and hopes of the people inside of Syria, it will work better. 
So we are going to continue to use every lever and every bit of influence that we have to effect the situation inside of Syria.
You mentioned the issue of chemical weapons.  We have called for, and we know that the U.N. is now moving forward on an investigation of exactly what happened.  We're monitoring the situation ourselves.  I have said publicly that the use of chemical weapons by the Assad regime would be a game-changer from our perspective, because once you let that situation spin out of control it's very hard to stop, and can have enormous spillover effects across the region. 
And so we are going to continue to closely consult with everybody in the region and do everything we can to bring an end to the bloodshed and to allow the Syrian people to get out from under the yoke of a leader who has lost all legitimacy because he is willing to slaughter his own people.  And I'm confident that Assad will go.  It's not a question of if, it's when. 
And so part of what we have to spend a lot of time thinking about is what's the aftermath of that, and how does that work in a way that actually serves the Syrian people -- and, by the way, serves the Syrian people from all walks of life, from all religious affiliations.  Because one of the things that we know is happening in this region is that if we fail to create a model in the Arab world in which people can live side by side -- regardless of whether they are Sunni or Shia or Alawaites or Druze -- regardless of the manner in which they worship their God -- if we don't create that possibility, then these problems are going to occur again and again and again and again. 
I think His Majesty understands that.  I think the people of Jordan understand that.  And these kinds of sectarian and tribal fault lines are part of what we have to get beyond, because they don't work in a modern world.  They don't create jobs.  They don't put food in the mouths of children.  They don't provide an education.  They don't create a thriving economy. 
And that's going to be a central challenge not just in Syria, but across the region.  And the United States I think has something to say about that, because part of what makes us a superpower is because we have people of every walk of life, every background, every religion, and if they've got a good idea and they're willing to work hard, they can succeed.  And that's got to be something that's more consistently spoken about not just with respect to the Syria situation, but I think with respect to this enormous moment of both promise but also danger in the Arab world and in North Africa. 
Julie Pace.
Well, I am very concerned about Syria becoming an enclave for extremism, because extremists thrive in chaos.  They thrive in failed space.  They thrive in power vacuums.  They don't have much to offer when it comes to actually building things, but they're very good about exploiting situations that are no longer functioning.  They fill that gap.
And that's why I think it's so important for us to work as an international community to help accelerate a political transition that is viable, so that a Syrian state continues to function; so that the basic institutions can be rebuilt, that they're not destroyed beyond recognition; that we are avoiding what inevitably becomes Syrian -- or sectarian divisions -- because, by definition, if you're an extremist then you don't have a lot of tolerance for people who don't share your beliefs. 
	So this is part of the reason why, for the American people, we've got to recognize we have a stake here.  We can't do it alone.  And the outcome in Syria is not going to be ideal.  Even if we execute our assistance and our coordination and our planning and our support flawlessly, the situation in Syria now is going to be difficult.  And that's what happens when you have a leader who cares more about clinging to power than they do about holding their country together and looking after their people. 
It's tragic.  It's heartbreaking.  And the sight of children and women being slaughtered that we've seen so much I think has to compel all of us to say, what more can we do?  And that's a question that I'm asking as President every single day.  And that's a question I know His Majesty is asking in his capacity here in Jordan. 
And what I am confident about is that ultimately what the people of Syria are looking for is not replacing oppression with a new form of oppression.  What they're looking for is replacing oppression with freedom and opportunity and democracy, and the capacity to live together and build together.  And that's what we have to begin planning for now, understanding that it is going to be difficult.
Something has been broken in Syria, and it’s not going to be put back together perfectly, immediately, anytime soon -- even after Assad leaves.  But we can begin the process of moving it in a better direction.  And having a cohesive political opposition I think is critical to that.
With respect to the conversation that took place between Prime Minister Netanyahu and Prime Minister Erdogan, I have long said that it is in both the interest of Israel and Turkey to restore normal relations between two countries that have historically had good ties.  It broke down several years ago as a consequence of the flotilla incident.  For the last two years I’ve spoken to both Prime Minister Netanyahu and Prime Minister Erdogan about why this rupture has to be mended, that they don’t have to agree on everything in order for them to come together around a whole range of common interests and common concerns.
During my visit, it appeared that the timing was good for that conversation to take place.  I discussed it with Prime Minister Netanyahu and both of us agreed that the moment was right, and, fortunately, they were able to begin the process of rebuilding normal relations between two very important countries in the region. 
This is a work in process.  It’s just beginning.  As I said, there are obviously going to still be some significant disagreements between Turkey and Israel -- not just on the Palestinian question, but on a range of different issues.  But they also have a whole range of shared interests, and they both happen to be extraordinarily strong partners and friends of ours, and so it’s in the interest of the United States that they begin this process of getting their relationship back in order.  And I’m very glad to see that it’s happening.
Well, first of all, I think His Majesty described what I’ve tried to accomplish on this trip very well.  This is a trip to make sure I’m doing my homework.  We all recognize how vital it could be to see a resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.  We set expectations low precisely because there’s been a lot of talk over decades but it hasn’t produced the results that everybody wants to see. 
And so my approach here has been let me listen to the parties first; let me find out exactly what the roadblocks are for progress; let me discuss with them ways that we might move those roadblocks out of the way in order to achieve a concrete result. 
And I’ve also been modest because, frankly, peace will not be achieved unless ultimately the parties themselves want peace.
	I think all of us in the international community share this frustration -- why can’t we get this problem solved?  I think the Israeli people are frustrated that they feel this problem is not solved.  They don’t enjoy the isolation that has resulted from this conflict.  I think the Palestinian people certainly feel that frustration. 
As I mentioned in my speech yesterday, I had the opportunity to meet with young people who are growing up unable to do the basic things that a free people should expect they should be able to do -- simple things like travel, or enjoying the kinds of privacy in their own homes that so many of us take for granted.  And these are children, these are young people -- these are young men and women who, as I described yesterday, aren't very different from my daughters, and they deserve the same opportunities.  They deserve this cloud to be lifted from their lives -- because they can achieve and they have enormous potential, and I don't want them living up under a sense of constricted possibility. 
I also don't want the Israeli people continually looking over their shoulder, thinking that at any point their house may be hit by a rocket, or a bus may be blown up.  And so part of the tragedy of the situation has been that neither side is getting exactly what they want, but it's not been possible to break out of old patterns and a difficult history. 
So my hope and expectation is that, as a consequence of us doing our homework, we can explore with the parties a mechanism for them to sit back down, to get rid of some of the old assumptions, to think in new ways and to get this done.  And I think if it gets done in a timely way, then the Israeli people will be safer and the Palestinian people will be freer.  And children on both sides will have a better life.  And as a consequence, the region as a whole will be strengthened and the world will be safer. 
I can't guarantee that that's going to happen.  What I can guarantee is we'll make the effort.  What I can guarantee is that Secretary Kerry is going to be spending a good deal of time in discussions with the parties.  What I can assure you is, is that nobody feels a greater interest in us achieving this than His Majesty.  And so we're just going to keep on plugging away.
The one thing I did say I think to both sides is the window of opportunity still exists but it's getting more and more difficult.  The mistrust is building instead of ebbing.  The logistics of providing security for Israel get more difficult with new technologies.  And the logistics of creating a contiguous and functioning Palestinian state become more difficult with settlements.  And so both sides have to begin to think about their long-term strategic interests instead of worrying about can I gain a short-term tactical advantage here or there, and say to themselves, what's the big picture and how do we get this done? 
And that's ultimately what I believe both peoples want -- which is why I think -- I think it was very interesting that in my speech in Jerusalem, some of the strongest applause came when I addressed the Israeli people and I said, you have to think about these Palestinian children like your own children.  It tapped into something that they understood inherently.  And that gives me hope.  I think that shows there's possibility there.  But it's hard.  And what I also said was that ultimately people have to help provide the structures for leaders to take some very difficult risks. 
So that's why I wanted to speak directly to the Israeli people and to the Palestinian people, so that they help empower their leadership to make some very difficult decisions in order to achieve a compromise where neither side is going to get a hundred percent of what they want.  So we'll see if we can make it happen.
Jon Karl.
Well, first of all, Jon, I'm not going to engage in a whole bunch of hypotheticals.  Because what I've said from the moment I came into office was that the best resolution of this situation is through diplomacy, and I continue to believe that. 
We have organized the international community around a sanctions regime that is having an impact on Iran -- not because we forced other countries to do it; because they recognize that if you trigger a nuclear arms race in this region, as volatile as it is, if you have the prospect of nuclear weapons getting into the hands of terrorists and extremists, that it's not just Israel that's threatened, it's a whole range of people that could be threatened. 
We're talking right now about the possibility of Syria using chemical weapons.  What would be the conversation if Syria possessed nuclear weapons? 
So this is not just a problem for Israel.  It's not just a problem for the United States.  It's a regional and worldwide problem.  And, by the way, we have been consistent in saying that nonproliferation is a problem around the globe, not just with respect to Iran.  The fact of the matter is, is that Iran has not been able to establish credibly with the international community that, in fact, it is simply pursuing peaceful nuclear power.  There's a reason why it's subject to all these resolutions and violations identified by the United Nations.  That's not something we made up.
There are a lot of other countries who have the technical capacity, but for some reason, they are able to get right with the international community.  Iran has not been able to do so. 
Now, if in fact what the Supreme Leader has said is the case, which is that developing a nuclear weapon would be un-Islamic and that Iran has no interest in developing nuclear weapons, then there should be a practical, verifiable way to assure the international community that it’s not doing so.  And this problem will be solved -- to the benefit of the region and to the benefit of the Iranian people. 
The Iranian people are celebrating Nowruz, their most important holiday.  And every year I deliver a Nowruz message.  And I remind the people of Iran that they are a great civilization; they have an extraordinary history; they have unbelievable talent -- they should be fully integrated then to the international community, where they can thrive and build businesses and expand commerce.  And there should be exchanges and travel and interactions with the Iranian people and everyone else, including the United States.  That should be the vision -- not threats to raze Israeli cities to the ground.
Part of the frustration that I think we all feel sometimes is that it seems as if people spend all their time organizing around how they can gain advantage over other people, or inflict violence on other people, or isolate other people, instead of trying to figure out how do we solve problems.  This is a solvable problem -- if, in fact, Iran is not pursuing a nuclear weapon. 
And so we’re going to continue to apply the pressure that we have in a nonmilitary way to try to resolve the problem.  We will continue to try to pursue diplomatic solutions to the situation.
	But, yes, I have said as President of the United States that I will maintain every option that’s available to prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon because I think the consequences for the region and for the world would be extraordinarily dangerous. 
My hope and expectation is, is that, among a menu of options, the option that involves negotiations, discussions, compromise, and resolution of the problem is the one that’s exercised.  But as President of the United States, I would never take any option off the table.
Thank you to the people of Jordan.