Fact Sheet: Administration Partners with Industry to Get Service Members Credentialed for High-Demand Jobs
Today, speaking at the White House Forum on Military Credentialing and Licensing, First Lady Michelle Obama will announce the IT Training and Certification Partnership, a new public-private partnership that will enable thousands of service members to earn industry-recognized information technology (IT) certifications before they transition from military service. The Administration will also announce a new grant program through the Department of Health and Human Services that will help veterans with health care experience pursue professional nursing careers and earn a nursing license.
Additionally, the event will feature four roundtables that will lay plans for the launch of additional public-private initiatives that will streamline the ability of service members and veterans to earn the civilian certifications and licenses required for high-demand jobs in emergency medical services, healthcare, and transportation sectors as well as streamline the ability for service members and veterans to translate military experience into academic credit. Key stakeholders from the private sector, the military services, industry trade associations, unions, educational institutions, state legislatures, veteran service organizations, and state licensing boards will participate in the sector-specific roundtables.
Today’s announcement builds upon President Obama’s June 2012 announcement of partnerships with the manufacturing sector that enable service members to earn high-demand advanced manufacturing certifications, and the establishment of the Department of Defense’s Military Credentialing and Licensing Task Force. Additionally, the event is an extension of the First Lady’s challenge to our Nation’s Governors in February 2013 to take executive or legislative action to help our troops get the credentials they need to successfully transition to the civilian labor market by the end of 2015. Mrs. Obama also recently attended the bill signing with Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley for that state’s Veterans Full Employment Act of 2013 and met with sailors at the U.S. Naval Academy who stand to benefit from the legislation.
A New Public-Private Partnership to Connect Veterans with High-Tech Jobs
Last June, the Department of Defense (DoD), at the President’s direction, established a Military Credentialing and Licensing Task Force. The Task Force has focused its initial efforts on: (1) identifying military specialties that readily transfer to high-demand jobs; (2) working with civilian credentialing and licensing associations to address gaps between military training programs and certification and licensing requirements; and (3) providing service members and veterans with greater access to necessary certification and licensing exams. The Task Force’s work is focused on industries that have an identified need for more skilled workers and stand to benefit from military expertise and training, including manufacturing, first responders, healthcare, information technology, and transportation and logistics.
Today’s announcement is the second major partnership developed through the Task Force, and will provide opportunities for up to 161,000 service members to gain industry-recognized, nationally-portable certifications necessary for 12 high-demand technology professions, including computer programmers, quality assurance engineers, and IT security analysts. The technology professions targeted through this partnership are expected to generate more than 1.8 million job opportunities by 2020, and have an average annual salary of more than $81,000. Due to the high-quality of their military training, our veterans have the skill sets that employers demand to fill these positions.
Through the Military Credentialing and Licensing Task Force, the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps have worked with Cisco and a broad consortium of IT corporations and credentialing associations to expand the availability of certifications to military personnel with skills in high-demand areas such as computer programming, information assurance, network administration, and program design. Through this partnership, service members will be able to partake in a gap analysis of their IT skills and then test for and earn civilian credentials above and beyond those required for their military occupation. Additionally, during the pilot phase of this program, service members will be able to participate in bridge training programs, free of cost, if the gap analysis indicates it is needed for the service member to obtain his or her civilian credential. This partnership targets service members who are in the process of transitioning out of the military and into the civilian workforce as well as service members at early- and mid-stages of their military careers. Participating service members who are in the process of transitioning to the civilian workforce will be connected to resources that can link those service members with employers ready to hire by state and region
Although the majority of IT specialists in the military receive training equivalent to their civilian IT counterparts, few, on their own, seek additional off-duty industry training that can lead towards additional IT certifications above and beyond those required for their military occupation. For example, training for the Navy's Information Technology and Information Technology Submarines occupations match up 100 percent with the CompTIA A+ and CompTIA Security+ certifications that are necessary for a variety of IT jobs. However, the IT Training and Certification Partnership can be used to leverage additional training opportunities that can directly contribute towards service members attaining civilian IT-related certifications beyond those that are provided in-service.
Industry leaders have committed support to this initiative in the following ways:
• As part of this initiative, Cisco Systems, along with Futures, Inc., developed the IT Training and Certification Program that will match Military Occupation Codes (MOCs) with private sector core technology career paths. In an effort to leverage the unique skills, experience, and qualifications that military personnel possess, Cisco also worked with its partners, Global Knowledge and Pearson VUE, to provide ANSI-accredited Cisco training courses that will allow transitioning military personnel to prepare for Cisco CCNA certification exams and other globally recognized industry certifications at no cost to participants. Through the opportunities provided by the training program, participants will receive fast track training and IT certifications that can help address the nation’s workforce gap in IT jobs. Cisco is also one of several IT companies that have agreed to send a letter to its more than 15,000 U.S. channel partners and suppliers encouraging them to hire and train veterans.
• Microsoft Corporation, in partnership with Global Knowledge and Prometric, will donate 500 exam vouchers and partially underwrite the cost of training for service members to receive Microsoft official skills training. Service members participating in the program will have the opportunity to attain the skills needed to get hired in today’s competitive IT job market. The training and exam vouchers are designed to help service members meet the criteria and pass the exams to achieve industry-recognized Microsoft Certification credentials that can help support a transition from the military to frontline jobs in the field of Information Technology. By earning a Microsoft Certified Professional (MCP) credential, service members will have access to MCP benefits, such as MCP job boards, networking opportunities and certification credentials.
• Oracle is proud to work with the White House, Office of the Secretary of Defense, and community colleges across the United States to help service members transition their skills for integration into the civilian IT workforce. Through its Oracle Academy and Oracle University Workforce Development programs, Oracle is committed to delivering technology, courseware, career-readiness and computer science resources for Database Design, SQL, and Java. Service members may participate in these Oracle education programs in a variety of formats, including online and in-class training, as standalone classes or as part of degree-granting programs. For transitioning military, Oracle University is also providing support for its industry-recognized certifications and career pathways. In partnership with Cisco and Futures, Oracle is contacting its more than 20,000 U.S. channel partners and suppliers encouraging them to hire and train veterans.
• As part of the IT Training and Certification Program, CompTIA is donating vouchers for certification exams, such as CompTIA A+ and CompTIA Security+, to program participants. This continues CompTIA’s longstanding commitment to the Department of Defense and the Armed Forces. CompTIA participates in the DoD Information Assurance Program and contributes to the Wounded Warriors Project through its foundation, Creating IT Futures. Beyond these activities, CompTIA has previously committed to train and certify 35,000 veterans and military spouses by the end of 2013, and 92,000 by 2016, with an IT certification through its Troops to Tech Careers initiative.
• NetApp is pleased to work with the White House to offer web-based training and a storage certification to military service personnel. The NetApp Certified Storage Associate certification (NCSA) is an entry-level certification designed to familiarize participants with storage technology and terminology. Via its Academic Alliances Program, NetApp will provide veterans and service personnel with NetApp Learning Accounts, access to web-based training classes, the ability to complete hands-on lab exercises through a virtual lab environment, and test vouchers for a local Pearson Vue testing center.
• HP has collaborated with the White House and the military services to assist U.S. service members in their transition to civilian IT jobs. Through the HP ExpertOne program, U.S. service members can earn industry-recognized certifications and achieve job-ready IT skills through hands-on experience. HP ExpertOne working with HP Education Services, an approved US military services training provider, will be contributing HP web based
	training and exam vouchers targeting Cloud or Converged Infrastructure administration to the IT Training and Credentialing Program. Additionally, HP ExpertOne will provide community memberships for the pilot population, giving service members access to free learning opportunities, personalized certification recommendations, and a global community of IT professionals and HP experts.
• Futures Inc. is providing the IT Pipeline platform that will be the centralized hub for matching and connecting transitioning and Reserve Component personnel with civilian training, certification, and employment opportunities. IT Pipeline is designed to address the assessment, training, credentialing and hiring challenges faced by our military personnel as they transition to civilian employment. The IT Pipeline platform will also enable employers to match their jobs with transitioning personnel based on their military training, experience, education, and credentials.
• A key partner in this effort is Global Knowledge, a leader in IT and business training. The company is providing training scholarships to exiting military, enabling them to obtain the gap training needed to gain the industry-recognized IT certifications civilian employers value and often require. The program courses are mapped to the most in-demand IT jobs such as application development, network security, and IT project management.
• GogoTraining is providing access to their online self-paced Information Technology training platform to help transitioning military personnel prepare for careers in the private sector. With the help of GogoTraining’s learning platform, experts bring their classroom courses to life online enabling service members to fit training into their schedule while still receiving the same high quality classroom content and support. GogoTraining courses and programs will help exiting personnel prepare for careers in computer programming, database administration, software and mobile application development, and obtain key certifications in areas such as CompTIA and Oracle.
• SANS Institute and Global Information Assurance Certification (GIAC) are proud to be part of this pilot program, helping to train and certify service members returning to the civilian workforce. SANS and GIAC are providing training and certification scholarships to the pilot program. SANS is the largest source for information security training in the world and GIAC is the leading provider of technical, job-duty-specific information security certifications and its exams validate the hands-on ability of practitioners around the world.
National Academy of Sciences
	Washington, D.C.
11:30 A.M. EDT
THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you very much.  Thank you so much.  (Applause.)  Please, everybody have a seat. 
Well, it’s good to be back.  Good morning, everybody, and thank you, Dr. Cicerone, for the kind introduction and the great work that you do.  The good doctor was reminding me that the first time I came here, apparently joking, I warned him and John Holdren not to age too much in their jobs.  And it turns out I'm the guy who’s aged.  (Laughter.)  They look great.
But, as always, it’s an honor to join our nation’s preeminent scholars, including my own Science Advisor, John Holdren, to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the National Academy of Sciences.  And since I did not do well enough in chemistry or physics to impress you much on those topics, let me instead tell a story.
One hundred and fifty years ago, the nation, as all of you know, was in the midst of the Civil War, and the Union had recently suffered a devastating defeat at Fredericksburg.  The road ahead seemed long and uncertain.  Confederate advances in weapons technology cast a dark shadow on the Union.
The previous spring, in the waters outside of Hampton Roads, the ironclad Confederate battleship Virginia had sunk two wooden Union ships and advanced on a third, and this endangered the Union blockade of Virginia and threatening Union forces along the Potomac River.  And then, overnight, the USS Monitor, an ironclad herself, arrived and fought the Virginia to a draw in the world’s first battle between iron-sided ships.
There was no victor, but the era of ironclad warfare had begun.  And it brought unexpected challenges for President Lincoln and his Navy as they expanded this fleet in early 1863, because aboard their new iron-side battleships, sailors found that the iron siding made the ships’ compasses unpredictable, so it skewed navigation, and they were bumping into things and going the wrong way.  (Laughter.)  So the basic physics of magnetism undermined the usefulness of the ironclad vessels, even as the Confederates were stocking up on them. 
And that’s where your predecessors came in.  Because in March of 1983 -- 1863, rather -- President Lincoln and Congress established the National Academy of Sciences as an independent and nonprofit institution charged with the mission to provide the government with the scientific advice that it needed.  And this was advice that was particularly useful in the thick of battle. 
The National Academy soon counted the nation’s top scientists as members.  They quickly got to work.  By the next year, they were inspecting the Union’s ironclads and installing an array of bar magnets around the compasses to correct their navigation.  So right off the bat, you guys were really useful.  (Laughter.)  In fact, it’s fair to say we might not be here had you not -- (laughter) -- certainly I would not be here.  (Laughter and applause.)
Now, political leaders have long recognized the connection between technology and warfare throughout our human history.  Sadly, this is an element of the human condition.  We take our wars very seriously and we're always looking for new ways to engage in a war.  But President Lincoln founded the Academy with a mandate that went far beyond the science and technology of war. Even as the nation was at war with itself, President Lincoln had the wisdom to look forward, and he recognized that finding a way to harness the highest caliber scientific advice for the government would serve a whole range of long-term goals for the nation. 
It was the same foresight that led him to establish land-grant colleges and finish the Transcontinental Railroad -- the idea that the essence of America is this hunger to innovate, this restlessness, this quest for the next big thing.  And although much of this innovation would be generated by the powers of our free market, the investments and the convening power of the federal government could accelerate discovery in a way that would continually push the nation forward. 
That's our inheritance, and now the task falls to us.  We, too, face significant challenges -- obviously not of the magnitude that President Lincoln faced, but we've got severe economic and security and environmental challenges.  And what we know from our past is that the investments we make today are bound to pay off many times over in the years to come. 
So we will continue to pursue advances in science and engineering, in infrastructure and innovation, in education and environmental protection -- especially science-based initiatives to help us minimize and adapt to global threats like climate change.
And I’m confident we’ll meet that task because we’ve got you -- brilliant and committed scientists to help us guide the way.  And part of what’s made the Academy so effective is that all the scientists elected to your elite ranks are volunteers -- which is fortunate because we have no money anyway.  (Laughter.)  For 150 years, you’ve strived to answer big questions, solve tough problems, not for yourselves but for the benefit of the nation.  And that legacy has endured from the Academy’s founding days.  And when you look at our history, you’ve stepped up at times of enormous need and, in some cases, great peril. 
When Woodrow Wilson needed help understanding the science of military preparedness, he asked the Academy’s eminent scientists to lay it out for him.  When George W. Bush, more recently, wanted to study the long-term health effects of traumatic brain injuries suffered by soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan, he set your scholars to the task.  Today, my administration relies on your expertise to answer critical questions like:  How do we set our priorities for research?  How can we get the most out of the nanotechnology revolution?  What are the underlying causes of gun violence?
And more important than any single study or report, the members of this institution embody what is so necessary for us to continue our scientific advance and to maintain our cutting-edge, and that’s restless curiosity and boundless hope, but also a fidelity to facts and truth, and a willingness to follow where the evidence leads. 
And I’d like to acknowledge the other organizations that have been obviously very important in this whole process -- the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, the Institute of Medicine -- all who’ve contributed similar leadership in maintaining the tradition, upholding the highest standard of science. 
And, by the way, we do have colleagues in Congress who believe in science and believe in evidence.  One of them is here, Congress Rush Holt.  We’re very grateful to him for his outstanding work.  (Applause.)  And I want to thank many of the members of my administration, as well as PCAST, my -- I always forget what exactly it stands for but -- (laughter) -- it’s my smart science people -- (laughter) -- who have contributed enormously to the work that we’re doing on a whole range of issues, from energy to advanced manufacturing, have really been extraordinary.  I want to thank the members of my administration who are here as well who all are invested in making sure that we keep American science the best in the world. 
Now, the good news is America remains a world leader in patents and scientific discovery.  Our university system is the crown jewel of our economy as well as our civilization.  And that’s what’s allowing us to continually replenish our stock of people who are willing to dream big dreams and reach higher than anybody else. 
And what I want to communicate to all of you is, is that as long as I’m President, we’re going to continue to be committed to investing in the promising ideas that are generated from you and your institutions, because they lead to innovative products, they help boost our economy, but also because that’s who we are.  I’m committed to it because that’s what makes us special and ultimately what makes life worth living. 
And that’s why we’re pursuing “grand challenges” like making solar energy as cheap as coal, and building electric vehicles as affordable as the ones that run on gas.  And earlier this month, I unveiled the BRAIN initiative, which will give scientists the tools that they need to get a dynamic picture of the brain in action, and better understand how we think and learn and remember. 
Today, all around the country, scientists like you are developing therapies to regenerate damaged organs, creating new devices to enable brain-controlled prosthetic limbs, and sending sophisticated robots into space to search for signs of past life on Mars.  That sense of wonder and that sense of discovery, it has practical application but it also nurtures what I believe is best in us. 
And right now, we’re on the brink of amazing breakthroughs that have the chance, the potential to change life for the better -- which is why we can’t afford to gut these investments in science and technology.  Unfortunately, that’s what we’re facing right now.  Because of the across-the-board cuts that Congress put in place -- the sequester, as it’s known in Washington-speak -- it’s hitting our scientific research.  Instead of racing ahead on the next cutting-edge discovery, our scientists are left wondering if they’ll get to start any new projects, any new research projects at all over the next few years, which means that we could lose a year, two years of scientific research as a practical matter because of misguided priorities here in this town. 
With the pace of technological innovation today, we can’t afford to stand still for a year or two years or three years.  We’ve got to seize every opportunity we have to stay ahead.  And we can’t let other countries win the race for ideas and technology of the future.  And I say that, by the way, not out of just any nationalistic pride -- although, obviously, that’s part of it -- but it’s also because nobody does it better than we do when it’s adequately funded, when it’s adequately supported.  And what we produce here ends up having benefits worldwide.  We should be reaching for a level of private and public research and development investment that we haven’t seen since the height of the Space Race.  That’s my goal.
And it’s not just resources.  I mean, one of the things that I've tried to do over these last four years and will continue to do over the next four years is to make sure that we are promoting the integrity of our scientific process; that not just in the physical and life sciences, but also in fields like psychology and anthropology and economics and political science -- all of which are sciences because scholars develop and test hypotheses and subject them to peer review -- but in all the sciences, we’ve got to make sure that we are supporting the idea that they’re not subject to politics, that they’re not skewed by an agenda, that, as I said before, we make sure that we go where the evidence leads us.  And that’s why we’ve got to keep investing in these sciences. 
And what’s true of all sciences is that in order for us to maintain our edge, we’ve got to protect our rigorous peer review system and ensure that we only fund proposals that promise the biggest bang for taxpayer dollars.  And I will keep working to make sure that our scientific research does not fall victim to political maneuvers or agendas that in some ways would impact on the integrity of the scientific process.  That’s what’s going to maintain our standards of scientific excellence for years to come.
That’s why, by the way, one of the things that I’ve focused on as President is an all-hands-on-deck approach to the sciences, as well as technology and engineering and math.  And that’s why we’re spending a lot of time focused on the next generation.  With the help of John Holdren and everybody who’s working with my administration, we want to make sure that we are exciting young people around math and science and technology and computer science.  We don’t want our kids just to be consumers of the amazing things that science generates; we want them to be producers as well.  And we want to make sure that those who historically have not participated in the sciences as robustly -- girls, members of minority groups here in this country -- that they are encouraged as well.
We’ve got to make sure that we’re training great calculus and biology teachers, and encouraging students to keep up with their physics and chemistry classes.  That includes Malia and Sasha.  (Laughter.)  It means teaching proper research methods and encouraging young people to challenge accepted knowledge.  It means expanding and maintaining critical investments in biomedical research and helping innovators turn their discoveries into new businesses and products.  And it means maintaining that spirit of discovery. 
Last week, I got a chance to do one of my favorite things as President and that is -- we started these White House Science Fairs.  And these kids are remarkable.  I mean, I know you guys were smart when you were their age, but -- (laughter) -- I might give them the edge.  (Laughter.)  I mean, you had young people who were converting algae into sustainable biofuels -- that was one of my favorites because the young lady had -- she kept the algae under her bed -- and she had a whole lab, which meant that she had really supportive parents.  (Laughter.)  I pictured it bubbling out and starting to creep into the hallways.  (Laughter.) 
You had young people who were purifying water with bicycle-power-generated batteries.  You had young people who had already devised faster and cheaper tests for cancer.  These are 15, 16-year-olds. 
They were all dreaming to grow up and be just like you -- maybe with a little less gray hair -- (laughter) -- but they shared your passion.  They shared that excitement.  And what was interesting was not only did they share that sense of wonder and discovery, but they also shared this fundamental optimism that if you figured this stuff out, people’s lives would be better; that there were no inherent barriers to us solving the big problems that we face as long as we were diligent and focused and observant and curious. 
And we’ve got to make sure that we’re supporting that next generation of dreamers and risk-takers -- because if we are, things will be good.  They leave me with extraordinary optimism. They leave me hopeful.  They put a smile on my face.  And I’m absolutely convinced that if this Academy and the successors who become members of this Academy are there at the center and the heart of our public debate, that we’ll be able to continue to use the innovation that powers our economy and improves our health, protects our environment and security, that makes us the envy of the world. 
So I want to thank you on behalf of the American people.  And I want to make sure that you know that you’ve got a strong supporter in the White House. 
God bless you.  God bless the United States of America.  Thank you.  (Applause.)
END
	11:50 A.M. EDT
