As the 1998 bombings of the U.S. Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania underscored, Africa-based terrorists threaten the interests of the United States in addition to those of our African partners.  The United States government has no higher priority than protecting U.S. citizens from attack by terrorists and violent extremists.  But our efforts at countering terrorism in Africa are motivated as well by a recognition that extremist groups are tearing apart communities in many parts of the continent, robbing young people of their futures, constraining economic growth, and denying people the opportunity to reach their full potential.  African terrorist groups, such as al-Shabaab, al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), Boko Haram, and Ansar Bayt Al-Maqdis (ABM), threaten the security and prosperity of Africans across the continent.
We are committed to working with our African partners to address immediate threats and build durable and professional security sector institutions required to achieve our long-term counterterrorism objectives.
A Comprehensive Approach
The United States and our African partners are committed to countering terrorism in Africa through counterterrorism partnerships that draw on all of our tools:  military, diplomacy, financial action, intelligence, law enforcement, and development alike.  Our partnerships are building African partner capacities in the security and justice sectors to counter terrorism in a way that is consistent with the rule of law, and building the capacity of African governments and civil society in countering violent extremism (CVE) to neutralize violent ideologies before they spread.


Enhancing military capacity.  U.S. military personnel work hand-in-hand with their African counterparts to increase military capacity in countries threatened by terrorism.  The Department of Defense (DoD) provides much needed equipment to empower African partners’ ability to halt terrorism.  U.S. military personnel provide specialized training that includes instruction on planning, battlefield tactics, civil-military relations, best practices in counter-insurgency, and respect for the rule of law.  The United States also sponsors multinational exercises to increase collaboration and strengthen bonds among African partners.  The 2014 Flintlock Exercise, hosted by Niger, brought together more than 1,000 troops from 18 countries, including eight African nations.

Enhancing law enforcement capacity:  Strengthening our African partners’ civilian security and law enforcement capacity is another key priority of our counterterrorism strategy in Africa.  In FY2013, we trained 2,584 participants in 19 African countries on how to prevent, detect, and investigate terrorism threats; secure their borders; bolster legal frameworks to effectively prosecute terrorists within the rule of law; and manage responses to terrorist incidents in a rule-of-law framework that respects human rights, as part of the U.S. Department of State’s Antiterrorism Assistance (ATA) program.  The ATA program provides training on a wide range of disciplines, from bomb detection to crime scene investigation.  We have a longstanding ATA partnership with Tanzania, for example, which has helped institutionalize its counterterrorism training and stand-up a special marine police unit.  On the sidelines of the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit, the United States and Kenya signed a Customs Mutual Assistance Agreement (CMAA).  This agreement provides the legal framework to allow for the exchange of information and evidence to assist countries in the prevention, detection, and investigation of customs offenses – including those associated with terrorism-related activities.  

Restricting travel and stemming access to resources:   With our African partners, we work to restrict terrorists’ and terrorist organizations’ travel and their ability to raise, move, and store money.  The Terrorist Interdiction Program/Personal Identification Secure Comparison and Evaluation System provides partner countries in Africa border security assistance to identify, disrupt, and deter terrorist travel.    The Counterterrorism Finance (CTF) program, run by the Department of State, provides training to partner governments that will better enable them to restrict terrorists’ and terrorist organizations’ ability to raise, move, and store money.   CTF provides African nations with internal and cross-border financial investigations training to work effectively with counterparts in neighboring countries and assists these countries in strengthening their laws and regulations.  We have three CTF-funded Resident Legal Advisors (RLA) and two Department of Homeland Security advisors in Africa who provide mentoring and training to judges and prosecutors so they are better able to adjudicate and prosecute these cases. 

Drying up potential sources of recruits:  We also seek to stop terrorism before it begins by strengthening community resilience and creating environments that are inhospitable for terrorist recruitment.  In Chad, Niger, and Burkina Faso, for example, USAID is leading efforts to support youth empowerment through education, skills training, strengthening local governance capacity, and improving access to information via community radio, targeting groups most vulnerable to extremist ideologies.

Building global partnerships:  We have also worked in the multilateral arena to build international architecture to combat today’s terrorist threats.  In 2011 the United States co-founded the Global Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF), which includes participation from African countries.  The GCTF focuses on identifying critical civilian counterterrorism needs, mobilizing the necessary expertise and resources to address such needs, and enhancing global cooperation. 

Counterterrorism Partnerships Fund:  President Obama has asked Congress to create a new, $5 billion counterterrorism partnerships fund that will help build the capacity of our international partners to respond effectively to the terrorist threat.  If approved, this fund would allow the United States to provide additional training, equipment, and operational support for partner states in our shared fight against al-Shabaab, AQIM, Boko Haram and others.  It would also support targeted efforts to address the underlying conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, including by supporting partner efforts to combat terrorist safe havens.

Providing support to partners on the front lines
The United States is building strong partnerships with countries to address critical terrorist threats on the front lines in order to confront the threat at its roots.


Confronting Boko Haram:  We are deeply concerned by Boko Haram’s ongoing attacks against Nigeria’s citizens, civil institutions, and infrastructure, including the group’s April 2014 kidnapping of hundreds of schoolgirls.  To support the Nigerian-led efforts to combat Boko Haram, we are providing an array of military, law enforcement, and intelligence support, such as counter-Improvised Explosive Device training and forensics training.  We are also supporting the efforts of Nigeria and its neighbors to increase regional cooperation to combat Boko Haram.  Because the specter of terrorism requires more than just a security response, we have also worked to encourage and support the Nigerian government’s efforts to promote development in northern Nigeria, including by boosting health, education, and social service delivery.  Our security cooperation also supports the professionalization of key military units and underscores that effective counterterrorism policies and practices are those that respect human rights and are underpinned by the rule of law.

Working to Degrade Al-Shabaab:  In Somalia, we continue to support the Somali National Army and the African Union (AU) Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in their efforts to push al-Shabaab out of its strongholds.  The Department of State has invested more than $170 million to recruit and train forces to help protect Somalia’s institutions and citizens.  Since 2007 we have contributed more than half a billion dollars in training, equipment, and logistical support to AMISOM.  While these efforts have weakened al-Shabaab and pushed it out of a number of cities, the group remains the most significant threat to peace and security in Somalia and the region.  Our counterterrorism support for Somalia is embedded in an overarching policy of support for policies and reforms to eliminate the underlying sources of violence and increase national and regional stability.  A stable, peaceful Somalia and Horn of Africa are the best long-term deterrents to a resurgence of al-Shabaab.  Our Partnership for Regional East Africa Counterterrorism, has helped build the capacity and resilience of East African governments to contain the spread of, and counter the threat posed by, al-Qa’ida, al-Shabaab, and other terrorist organizations. 

Enabling Partners to combat al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM):  We provided support to our French and regional partners to reverse AQIM’s expansion in northern Mali in 2013 and help the people of Mali reclaim their future.  The United States has provided airlift and refueling support, and training and supplies to more than 6,000 African soldiers and police who have deployed to support the international response.  This international partnership paved the way for safe elections and improved stability in Mali, taking on both the immediate threat and the dire conditions that helped the extremists take hold in the first place.  Our Trans-Sahara Counterterrorism Partnership (TSCTP) has supported these efforts and other partner country efforts in the Sahel and the Maghreb to constrict and ultimately eliminate the ability of terrorist organizations to exploit the region by increasing security sector capacity, addressing underlying causes of radicalization, and amplifying local voices that speak out against violence. 

Confronting Terrorism in North Africa:  We continue to provide security and counterterrorism assistance and advice to our partners in North Africa to arrest the growth of extremist groups like Ansar al-Sharia in Tunisia, Ansar al-Sharia in Benghazi, and Ansar al-Sharia in Darnah.  Through the TSCTP, we are working with the government of Tunisia to build its capacity to confront terrorist threats.  We have also provided crisis response and tactical and command training to Tunisian security forces as well as training in leadership development, police reform, prison reform, hostage rescue, and crowd control management for the Justice and Interior ministries.  Additionally, we have provided vehicles to enhance internal and border security in Tunisia.  In Libya, we are working with the international community to train a Libyan General Purpose Force, build Libyan security institutional capacity, and improve the Libyan government’s ability to counter terrorism.

Today the President announced the Security Governance Initiative (SGI), a new joint endeavor between the United States and six African partners that offers a comprehensive approach to improving security sector governance and capacity to address threats.   
Africa is a dynamic and diverse region that is experiencing significant gains in economic growth and development, and African states are increasingly stepping up to confront security challenges.  But transnational and domestic security threats hinder progress, and gaps in security capacity to address both internal and external challenges persist.  These threats include terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram, al-Shabaab, al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) and others, which remain active on the continent; illicit activities - such as trafficking (drugs, humans, weapons, and wildlife) and piracy – which tear at the security fabric and help fund criminal, and in some cases extremist, activities; and domestic and regional conflict.
A New Presidential Initiative
Against this backdrop, the United States remains committed to working with our African partners and providing assistance to strengthen their security sectors.  The SGI is a new Presidential Initiative that offers an enhanced approach to security sector assistance beginning with six countries: Ghana, Kenya, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, and Tunisia. 


		Each of the six countries has demonstrated partnership with the United States, expressed a desire to strengthen its security sector, and committed to the core elements of the initiative. 

		In the initial year, $65 million would be dedicated to the initiative.  In subsequent years, the United States will provide additional funding commensurate with maturing program needs and expansion to additional countries.

		Together, the United States and participating African countries will work to improve security sector institution capacity to protect civilians and confront challenges and threats, with integrity and accountability.  To support a longer term focus, SGI will involve multi-year funding commitments of increased U.S. support and will require sustained, high-level leadership and commitment by partner countries to pursue policies in support of the agreed upon goals. 

Key Features
Partnership and results are at the core of SGI.  Together with our SGI partner countries, the United States will assist in developing joint strategies based on assessments and the determination of priorities and objectives.  Regular evaluations of programs will guide adjustments to assistance based on achieved results.  To execute the initiative and ensure maximum effectiveness of U.S. assistance, the United States will form a dedicated SGI team to be housed at the Department of State with support from the Department of Defense, the United States Agency for International Development, the Department of Justice, and the Department of Homeland Security.  
SGI is a distinctive approach that:


		Focuses on the systems, processes, and institutions that reinforce democratic security sector governance;

		Uses rigorous analysis, shared data, and agreed upon goals, and is supported by regular measurement and evaluation;

		Matches targeted investments with willing partners to strengthen specific military and civilian institutions; and

		Relies on commitment and accountability for results on the part of the United States and our partners.

The key goals and objectives of SGI are to:


		Increase partner nation capacity to meet citizen security needs, such as accessing justice, countering transnational threats, and contributing to regional and international security and stability;

		Prevent or mitigate instability and conflict and counter terrorist activities and their enabling environments;

		Advance U.S. interests and strategic goals, including promoting democratic governance, rule of law, respect for human rights, and long-term economic development while improving the effectiveness and sustainability of other U.S. security sector assistance investments and activities; and

		Deepen the impact of U.S. investments in countries that show leadership and political will to make reforms and policy decisions necessary to improve security sector governance.

SGI will focus on civilian and military security institutions and the ministerial functions that provide state oversight of the security sector.  SGI programs will differ in each country, reflecting specific partner country challenges, goals, and objectives.  For example, a country emerging from conflict may focus on strengthening law enforcement sector institutions – such as the national police, gendarmerie, and national guard – to provide effective, sustainable, and consistent law enforcement, community policing, and response to critical incidents in urban areas.  Additionally, SGI could focus on the justice sector – for example, strengthening a Ministry of Justice’s and Director of Public Prosecution’s ability to lead a government-wide effort against terrorism and other transnational crimes, provide oversight and accountability, and ensure effective and accountable corrections management.  In a more developed country that is a security exporter, for example, SGI could focus on enhancing capacity across security and rule of law institutions (e.g., defense, interior, and justice ministries).  In all partner countries, SGI will build security sector capacity – in both military and civilian institutions – through a comprehensive approach with targeted assistance that entails sustained leadership commitment from both the United States and partner countries. 
The United States strongly supports the work of more than 67,000 African peacekeepers serving with the African Union (AU) and United Nations (UN) in Africa.  These men and women are working to protect civilians, prevent violence, and promote security and stability in many of Africa’s most complex conflicts. 
Since 2009, the United States has committed to provide nearly $892 million to develop African peacekeeping capacity and strengthen African institutions.  The United States has trained and equipped more than a quarter-million African troops and police for service in UN and AU peacekeeping operations.
Saving Lives Through Rapid Response 
African countries have made clear that rapid response to crises is at the top of their peace and security agenda.  To support this priority, the United States announced at the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit the African Peacekeeping Rapid Response Partnership (APRRP, “A-Prep” for short) a new investment of $110 million per year for 3-5 years to build the capacity of African militaries to rapidly deploy peacekeepers in response to emerging conflict, a concept that holds powerful life-saving potential.   


		The United States will partner with an initial group of six countries—Senegal, Ghana, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda—to develop a rapid response capability program, by building improved capacity in areas such as military training, equipment maintenance and repair, institutional support, and interoperability with other Africa-based peacekeeping forces.

		Under this program, African partner nations will commit to maintaining forces and equipment ready to rapidly deploy and state their intent to deploy as part of UN or AU missions to respond to emerging crises. 

		The United States is not the only member of the international community that has a stake in this endeavor, so we will reach out to international partners to discuss how we can build a coalition to increase coordination on our goal to fill gaps in peacekeeping response.

		We are also prepared to provide support, including training for headquarters staff and key enabler functions, such as engineers, to catalyze the AU’s efforts to establish its African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis (ACIRC).

Building African Peacekeeping Capacity
Our new initiative builds on the United States’ longstanding commitment to developing partner capacity to support African countries and regional organizations to meet the challenges they face. 


		Our Global Peace Operations Initiative (GPOI) program has helped to build the capacity of African partners to conduct peacekeeping training themselves.

		Since 2005, through the Africa Contingency Operations Training and Assistance (ACOTA) program, which is primarily funded by GPOI, the United States has trained more than 248,000 peacekeepers from 25 partner countries across the continent, prior to their deployment to UN and AU peacekeeping operations.  The United States has expended more than $241 million in ACOTA activities since 2009 alone.

		In addition, through GPOI funding, the U.S. Africa Command has conducted specialized peacekeeping training for the African Union and 22 African partner countries since 2005 aimed at building a cadre of professional peacekeepers. 

		The United States also has provided training and equipment to more than 1,100 African police prior to their deployment to UN peacekeeping operations in Darfur, South Sudan, and Mali, through the International Police Peacekeeping Operations Support (IPPOS) program, underscoring the critical role of civilians in peacekeeping.

Supporting AU-led efforts to Respond to Conflict
The United States values the increased AU leadership and political will to mount responses to African conflicts, and is committed to strengthening the AU’s institutional capacity to launch and support peacekeeping operations, as well as increase interoperability among AU states during peacekeeping deployments.


		Since 2005, the United States has provided a peace and security advisor at the AU Headquarters, provided assistance to the AU’s Peace Support Operations Division, and provided training on defense resource management and command and control.

		The Department of Defense supports numerous training exercises that seek to increase partners’ interoperability in complex operations and strengthen the African Standby Force’s ability to plan, deploy, employ sustain, and redeploy troops to conflict areas.

		The United States is committed to delivering over the next year approximately $70 million worth of deployment equipment to African peacekeepers, including for AU forces in Somalia and the Central African Republic, which will give willing peacekeepers enhanced tools to carry out their missions. 

Supporting U.N. and AU Peacekeeping Operations
The United States continues to advance initiatives to strengthen UN and AU peacekeeping capabilities, including by seeking to expand the number, capacity, and effectiveness of troop and police contributors that are on the ground furthering Africa’s peace and security.   
The United States is by far the world's largest financial contributor to UN peacekeeping operations.  In FY 2013, the United States provided more than $1.7 billion in assessed contributions for UN peacekeeping in Africa, bringing our total assessed contributions to nearly $9 billion since 2009.


Central African Republic (CAR):  The AU-led International Support Mission to CAR (MISCA) and French forces operating alongside them are working to prevent further ethnic violence in CAR, and to restore stability and protect civilians.  The United States has committed to provide up to $100 million in support for these forces, and the President has requested up to $428 million in FY 2015 for anticipated assessed contributions during FY 2014 and FY 2015 for the new UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in CAR (MINUSCA).  These efforts underscore U.S. concern for the people of the CAR and aim to support restoration of security and provide humanitarian aid, while promoting accountability, reconciliation, and democratic governance.

Cote d’Ivoire:  U.S. assessed contributions for the UN Operation in Cote d’Ivoire (UNOCI) since 2009 exceed $885 million, and are helping UNOCI to protect civilians, support disarmament efforts, and monitor and promote human rights.  The United States also has provided critical support to Cote d’Ivoire’s post-conflict recovery, including bolstering border security, civilian protection, and stability in the wake of the 2011 election crisis.

Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC):  Since 2009, the United States has provided more than $2.1 billion in assessed contributions for the UN Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUSCO), to help protect civilians and support the DRC government in consolidating peace.  The United States funds an advisor to assist Congolese military justice personnel assigned to the MONUSCO-supported Prosecution Support Cells to investigate and prosecute serious crimes.  Three U.S. military personnel also currently serve in MONUSCO.  The United States strongly supported the revision of MONUSCO’s mandate in 2013 to empower it to take appropriate military action against abusive and destabilizing militias with the introduction of an intervention brigade (IB), and provided training to IB members prior to deployment. 

Liberia:  The United States has provided more than $879 million in assessed contributions since 2009 for the UN Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), enabling UNMIL to provide critical security during Liberia’s post-conflict transition, including a successful election in 2011 and the rebuilding of Liberia’s armed forces.  Five U.S. military personnel currently serve in UNMIL, and a U.S. flag officer recently completed a tour as the UNMIL chief of staff. 

Mali:  To address the instability in Mali, the United States has provided more than $115 million in assessed contributions for the UN Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).  The United States also provided airlift support and committed to provide up to $173 million in logistical support, training, and critical equipment, such as vehicles and communications, to African peacekeepers deploying to MINUSMA and its predecessor, the African-led International Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA).  Nine U.S. military personnel currently serve in MINUSMA.  U.S. support has enabled MINUSMA to provide critical stabilization and security and created the conditions for delivery of humanitarian aid and Mali’s pursuit of national reconciliation.

Somalia:  To help combat terrorism in Somalia and support the Somali Federal Government’s efforts to build security and stability, the United States has committed to provide more than $512 million to provide support to the AU Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to build capacity to counter al-Shabaab in Somalia and provide space for political progress.  This includes pre-deployment training, provision of military equipment, and advisors on the ground.   Additionally, the United States has provided more than $455 million in U.S contributions for the UN Support Office for AMISOM (UNSOA), thereby bolstering support to African Union forces.

South Sudan:  U.S. assessed contributions for the U.N. Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) since it was created in 2011 have been $635 million, supporting UNMISS efforts to protect civilians and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance.  Five U.S. military personnel currently serve in UNMISS.  U.S. leadership was essential in streamlining the mission’s mandate to focus on protection of civilians. 

Sudan-Darfur/Abyei:  Since 2009, the United States has provided nearly $2.4 billion in assessed contributions for the African Union-UN Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), and more than $182 million in assessed contributions for the UN Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).   U.S. support for these operations has strengthened civilian protection, facilitated humanitarian assistance, and promoted human rights and the rule of law.   

More than $200 million committed to programs that will empower more than 1 million people in Africa
Today, the Office of First Lady Michelle Obama, the George W. Bush Institute, and the U.S. Department of State hosted a day-long symposium for spouses entitled Investing in Our Future at the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit.
The symposium brought together First Lady Michelle Obama, Mrs. Laura Bush, African first spouses from nearly 30 countries, leaders from non-governmental and non-profit organizations, private sector partners, and other leading experts.
President George W. Bush delivered remarks at the event, announcing the expansion of the Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon® initiative and the important role of national leadership, including that of a First Spouse, in galvanizing a country to make the fight against women’s cancers a priority.
The symposium highlighted the important role first spouses play and focused on the impact of investments in education, health, and economic development through public-private partnerships.
The investments announced at the symposium total more than $200 million to support programs fostering improved education, health, and economic opportunity for more than 1 million Africans across the continent. Some of the announcements include:


The U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), in partnership with the Children’s Investment Fund Foundation (CIFF), launched Accelerating Children’s HIV/AIDS Treatment (ACT).  ACT is an ambitious $200 million initiative ($150 million from PEPFAR and up to $50 million from CIFF) to double the total number of children receiving life-saving antiretroviral therapy (ART) across ten priority African countries over the next two years.  This will enable 300,000 more children to receive ART.

Caterpillar Foundation announced a partnership with the U.S. Department of State’s African Women’s Entrepreneurship Program (AWEP) to create the first ever AWEP-Women’s Entrepreneurial Centers of Resources, Education, Access, and Training for Economic Empowerment (WECREATE) in sub-Saharan Africa.  Caterpillar Foundation and the U.S. State Department are providing $1 million each to create these self-sustaining women’s business centers where women can gain the tools, resources, support and education they need to become successful entrepreneurs and exporters. By being in control of their own financial destiny, women helped by the Centers will help to end the cycle of poverty faced by many girls and women in developing countries and catalyze economic development, prosperity and job creation in their respective countries.

Intel announced a new collaboration with the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) called the Women and the Web Alliance. The Alliance will catalyze a group of partners to address the gender and Internet gap by bringing more than 600,000 young women online in Nigeria and Kenya in the next 3 years. The Alliance consists of USAID, Intel, NetHope, World Pulse, World Vision, UN Women, and Women in Technology in Nigeria, combining efforts to transform girls’ and women’s lives and livelihoods in Africa through digital literacy training, relevant content, policy work, and online social networks.

The MasterCard Foundation announced that nearly 6,000 of the 15,000 students it has pledged to support with The MasterCard Foundation Scholars Program, predominantly from Africa, will be enrolled in high school and university by December 2014. By the end of the 10-year initiative, 75% of the Scholars will be girls and young women.

Walmart, through its Global Women’s Economic Empowerment Initiative, has committed to train one million farmers, half of which will be women, by the end of 2016. Today, through $3 million in grants and in partnership with leading NGOs and USAID – which is working with the Feed the Future initiative – Walmart is accelerating the pace of training and aiming to deliver training to more than 135,000 farmers - 80,000 of which will be women - in Kenya, Rwanda, and Zambia. Kenyan farmers taking part in the program should see farm incomes double in just one growing season.

		Additionally, six organizations made formal commitments to support Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon’s expansion into Ethiopia and Namibia. Their contributions toward Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon’s expansion comes in the form of financial commitments totaling nearly $3 million, and in-kind donations or assistance.

African First Ladies speaking in the program included: Mrs. Roman Tesfaye, First Lady of The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia; Mrs. Lordina Mahama, First Lady of The Republic of Ghana; and Mrs. Penehupifo Pohamba, First Lady of The Republic of Namibia.
Other program participants included: Deputy Secretary Heather Higginbottom, U.S. Department of State, Ambassador Deborah Birx, U.S. Department of State, Ambassador Cathy Russell, U.S. Department of State; Jamie Cooper, Children’s Investment Fund Foundation, Cherie Blair, Cherie Blair Foundation for Women; Shelly Esque, Intel Foundation; Ann Cotton, Camfed International; Dr. Sara Ruto, Uwezo; Reeta Roy, The MasterCard Foundation; Madame Aicha Bah Diallo, Foundation for African Women Educationalists; Isha Sesay, CNN International; Noa Gimelli, ExxonMobil; Neha Misra, Solar Sister; Kay Kuenker, Dow AgroSciences; Damaris Achieng Odeny, International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics; Deb Elam, GE Foundation; Bernard Olayo, M.D., Center for Public Health and Development; and Maggie Sans, Walmart Foundation
About the Bush Institute:
The mission of the Bush Institute at the George W. Bush Presidential Center is advancing freedom by expanding opportunities for individuals at home and across the globe. The Bush Institute is a non-partisan public policy institute committed to serious, independent research aimed at generating practical solutions to important public policy issues in the areas of education reform, human freedom, economic growth, and global health. Built on principles that guided President and Mrs. Bush in public life, the Bush Institute seeks to improve America’s public schools; foster the spread of democracy; save lives through global health programs; and promote free markets and economic growth. The Women’s Initiative works to improve access to education, health care, and economic opportunity for women and children around the world, and the Military Service Initiative honors our servicemen and servicewomen and helps them transition to civilian life.
About the First Ladies Initiative:
The First Ladies Initiative is a program of the Bush Institute’s Women’s Initiative, which helps prepare First Ladies’ senior advisors and staff with training sessions on effective governance, strategic planning, and communication, and also fosters public-private partnerships by connecting First Ladies with funding partners, corporations, and NGOs. These efforts help First Ladies effectively use their unique platforms to promote issues and programs that improve the lives of women and children in their countries, with an initial focus on Africa.
About Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon:
Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon® is the leading public-private partnership aimed at catalyzing the global community to reduce deaths from cervical and breast cancer in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America by raising awareness of these diseases and increasing access to quality services to detect and treat them. Its activities integrate prevention—including increased access to vaccination against the human papillomavirus (HPV)—screenings, and treatment into existing healthcare programs. Organizing members of the partnership include the George W. Bush Institute, the U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), Susan G. Komen®, and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). Corporate and foundation members include Becton, Dickinson and Company; the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation; the Bristol-Myers Squibb Foundation; the Caris Foundation; GlaxoSmithKline; IBM; Merck; and QIAGEN.
About the Young African Leaders Initiative: 
The Mandela Washington Fellowship is the flagship exchange program of the President’s Young African Leaders Initiative (YALI) and embodies President Obama’s commitment to invest in the future of Africa. The first class of Mandela Washington Fellows arrived in June 2014 for six weeks of intensive executive leadership training, networking, and skills building, followed by a Presidential Summit in Washington, DC.  Regional Leadership Centers in Africa, seed funding, mentoring, and a vast array of virtual resources will provide sustained support to the Fellows upon their return to the continent.  The YALI Network provides online and on the ground platforms, programs, and resources for tens of thousands of young African entrepreneurs, activists, and public officials.  Through YALI, young African leaders gain the skills, connections, and investments they need to accelerate their initiatives and contribute more robustly to strengthening democratic institutions, spurring economic growth, and enhancing peace and security in Africa.
Washington, D.C., August 4-6, 2014
I.                    Background
President Obama welcomed leaders from across the African continent to Washington, D.C., for a three-day U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit, the first of its kind.  The largest event any U.S. President has held with African heads of state and government, the Summit strengthened ties between the United States and one of the world’s most dynamic and fastest growing regions.
The Summit advanced our shared interests in increased U.S.-Africa trade and U.S. investment in Africa and highlighted America’s commitment to Africa’s security, its democratic development, and its people.  By enabling discussion of tangible actions that can be taken to deepen the U.S.-Africa partnership, the Summit fostered stronger ties between the United States and Africa.
The Summit theme, “Investing in the Next Generation,” reflected the common ambition that the people and government of the United States share with the people and governments of Africa to leave our nations better for future generations by making concrete gains in peace and security, good governance, and economic development. 
Based on extensive consultations and reflecting shared goals, Summit events included sessions on trade and investment, development, peace and security, and governance.  Other events enriched and informed the dialogue among heads of state and government, including the Young African Leaders Summit, the Civil Society Forum, the landmark U.S.-Africa Business Forum, and the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) Ministerial.  These events included a range of U.S. and African civil society, youth and business leaders and – underscoring a tradition of broad, bipartisan support for U.S. engagement with Africa – participation by Members of the U.S. Congress.  The Summit also included a day-long Spousal Program, hosted by First Lady Michelle Obama and former First Lady Laura Bush, that focused on the impact of investments in education, health, and public-private partnerships.
Leaders’ discussions centered on how to tackle shared challenges and accelerate progress in key areas: expanding trade and investment ties; creating educational and job opportunities for youth; accelerating and expanding our progress in promoting inclusive and sustainable development; intensifying cooperation on peace and security; and securing a better future for Africa’s next generation. 
II.                 Investing in Africa’s Future
Leaders discussed Africa’s potential as a new center of global growth that is creating more opportunities for its people than ever before.  Leaders also noted the challenge to ensure these gains are expanded and spread to benefit all of Africa’s people, which will create new markets and reinforce stability and democracy.
Leaders also agreed on the positive impacts that U.S.-Africa partnerships on public health have had on moving us closer to an AIDS-free generation, improving maternal-child health, dramatically reducing deaths from preventable disease, and moving people out of poverty.  They committed to redoubling efforts to control the outbreak of the Ebola virus in West Africa and, critically, working together to share expertise, as Africa moves towards the realization of the African Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
President Obama welcomed the progress made under the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) and the commitments made to continue Africa’s leadership on food security, including those made for the African Union (AU) Year of Agriculture to triple agricultural trade in order to end hunger.  Leaders welcomed the announcement of new investment commitments to the New Alliance for Food Security and Nutrition, which has now mobilized more than $10 billion.  They pledged that agriculture, nutrition, and food security would remain high on their shared agenda and to redouble efforts to promote resilience in order to increase the capacity of vulnerable communities to withstand the impact of external shocks, including climate change, and to promote climate-smart agriculture and value-addition.
Leaders welcomed the success of Power Africa, and decided to intensify joint efforts to double access to electricity in Africa, including within the African Union’s Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa (PIDA) Framework.  They emphasized the importance of regional power projects to fostering regional economic integration and the need to provide increased electricity through national grids and beyond the grid, particularly to remote and rural areas.  President Obama pledged $300 million in assistance per year to expand the reach of Power Africa in pursuit of a new, aggregate goal of 30,000 MW, and announced that Power Africa has now mobilized more than $26 billion.
Leaders decided to intensify efforts to increase intra-African trade, including through trade capacity building, regional integration, enabling the adoption of the legal and regulatory reforms that break down barriers to the free flow of goods and services, and improving Africa’s capacity to meet international standards.  President Obama announced the expansion of trade and investment platforms across the continent as well as additional trade capacity building assistance.
Leaders agreed on the importance of the prompt, long-term renewal of an enhanced African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), and pledged to work together to increase its utilization by African countries.  Leaders also agreed on the importance of increasing U.S. investment in Africa and welcomed the announcements made at the U.S.-Africa Business Forum, including over $14 billion in new private sector deals.  President Obama announced $7 billion in new financing under the Doing Business in Africa Campaign that will support U.S. trade with and investment in Africa over the next two years.  Leaders pledged to take action to drive further investment and industrialization.
Leaders affirmed the importance of working together to ensure that negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda focus on clear, measurable goals and reflect the rich experience and commitments of developing countries and the spirit of partnership between our countries. President Obama welcomed the commitment and sincerity conveyed by Africa’s decision to develop a thoughtful and substantive Common African Position and their long-term vision outlined in “Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want.”
III.               Advancing Peace and Regional Stability
Leaders noted that, at the same time that Africa is growing economically, conflict, crime, and terrorism continue to threaten many communities and constrain the continent’s prosperity.  Thus, Leaders resolved to address the root causes of conflict and to enhance conflict prevention mechanisms and capacity-building for peacekeeping.  They also determined to confront an increasingly lethal and geographically expansive set of transnational security threats. 
Leaders agreed that Africa’s complex security challenges demand increased state capacity and regional solutions.  Various leaders noted the need to confront transnational threats, including terrorism, with holistic approaches employing development in addition to security tools, advancing religious tolerance and supporting community voices. 
The Summit afforded President Obama the opportunity to laud African leadership in responding to crises while reaffirming America’s commitment to be a strong partner in confronting peace and security challenges.  To further this cooperation, the United States committed to: a new initiative over the next three to five years to build the capacity of African militaries to rapidly deploy peacekeepers in response to emerging conflict; create a Security Governance Initiative to pursue a strategic approach to building capacity in partner military and civilian security institutions and match expanded investments with leadership to pursue reforms; and expand its work to support information sharing among regional partners.
IV.              Governing for the Next Generation
The theme of the Summit, “Investing in the Next Generation,” represented recognition of the fact that Leaders have the opportunity and responsibility to ensure their actions pave the way for the freedom, dignity, and prosperity of their citizens.  Leaders engaged in a forthright and constructive dialogue on critical issues of governance and pledged to sustain this dialogue.
Leaders agreed that efficient, effective, and transparent governance is vital to the well-being of citizens, to boost investor confidence, and to sustain economic growth.  They recognized that an active, empowered citizenry can contribute most effectively to the prosperity and well-being of their nations, and discussed the role of civil society, volunteerism, and public service.  They further agreed on the centrality of inclusive growth and protection of human rights that benefit all citizens and communities. 
Recognizing the losses to the continent and its people from illicit financial flows and corruption, Leaders decided to establish a joint high-level working group to develop a plan of action for further work in this area.
V.                Investing in Women for Peace and Prosperity
Recognizing that nations reach their full potential only when women and men enjoy equal opportunity and respect for their rights under the law, Leaders resolved to work toward fuller participation for women in government, the economic sphere, and civil society.  They determined to seek expanded roles for women in forging peace and security, and to augment efforts to protect women and girls from gender-based violence.  They decided to promote women’s economic empowerment by improving access to markets and capital and by strengthening legal systems to protect their rights and opportunities.  And understanding that education is one of the most effective ways to expand opportunities and life choices for girls and young women, they decided to seek to close education gaps between boys and girls.
To advance these goals, the United States announced commitments to further support women’s participation in peacebuilding activities, increase efforts to help women entrepreneurs launch and expand their businesses, and support parliamentary efforts to promote women’s rights.
VI.              Providing Skills and Opportunities to Youth
The “Investing in the Next Generation” theme provided Leaders with the opportunity to discuss how to create opportunities, promote skills development especially in science, technology, research and innovation, and generate jobs for youth so they can advance economic growth and build the strong civic and public institutions needed to achieve shared goals.  Leaders discussed how Africa’s youth are already shaping political, social, and economic realities – and can be the driving force behind economic prosperity, good governance, and peace and security. 
In anticipation of the Summit, President Obama hosted a town hall with participants in the Mandela Washington Fellowship for Young African Leaders to hear directly from young African entrepreneurs, civic leaders, and public servants.  President Obama announced the expansion of his Young African Leaders Initiative (YALI) to create regional leadership centers on the continent, an online network of educational tools (including to support professional and vocational education), the doubling of the Mandela Washington Fellowship, and expanded resources for entrepreneurs to further support leadership development, promote entrepreneurship, and connect young leaders with one another and the United States.
Various African Leaders announced commitments to further expand their investments in youth.  The African Union Commission committed to redoubling its efforts to advance educational opportunities through the Pan-African University; to carry forward the African Youth Charter by urging Member States to consider the African Youth Decade Plan of Action as a road map for implementation; and to propose for adoption by Member States a Declaration and Plan of Action on Employment, Poverty Eradication, and Inclusive Development, with a primary focus on youth and women, at the upcoming Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and Governments of the African Union in Ouagadougou in September 2014. 
Benin has set up two business-type incubators and committed to recruiting 15,000 youth in 2015 to fill civil servant positions.  Burkina Faso announced a youth investment project involving 46,800 young men and women offered an opportunity to find sustainable jobs in the labor market.  Burundi recently established the Youth Employment Agency, which helps high school graduates obtain jobs and internships.  Cabo Verde will expand its current 20 youth centers to open one at each city and on every island in the country.  The Republic of the Congo has instituted the “Corps of Young Volunteers and Civil Service Trainees” to promote community service and civic education activities.  Cote d’Ivoire has declared 2014 a Year of Employment with special initiatives focused on youth, including a young entrepreneur’s competition.  Gabon has supported the creation of the Central African Economic and Monetary Community’s (CAEMC) “Train my Generation” Fund, which aims to support the training and employment of young people.  Guinea will host “The Guinea World Youth Congress” in December 2014.  Senegal included young leaders in its delegation to the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit and will do the same for the G-20.  Seychelles will use a newly set-up fund to support young entrepreneurs to boost youth employment.  Somalia will launch a youth empowerment framework with key initiatives in job creation and youth representation in the government.  Tanzania announced the establishment of a “State House Fellows” program, modeled on the long-standing White House Fellows program in the United States, to identify, train, and provide high-level experience to the next generation of Tanzanian leaders. 
VII.           Conclusion
Leaders underscored their appreciation for the strong benefits and positive outcomes that deepened U.S.-Africa cooperation affords and reiterated the need for intensified cooperation to advance shared security interests and our common goals to increase prosperity for the United States and African countries and to advance the dignity, well-being, and freedom of our people.
Leaders underscored the importance of ensuring steady follow-up regarding the commitments made at the Summit and of further deepening the partnership between the United States and the people and governments of Africa, as well as coordination with the African Union.  President Obama announced that the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit will be a recurring event.   
