Below is a list of expected attendees at tonight’s White House Dinner on the occasion of the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit. Additional details about the Summit Dinner are available HERE.
THE PRESIDENT and MRS. OBAMA
His Excellency Mohamed Abdulaziz, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, State of Libya
His Excellency Jean-Paul Adam, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Seychelles
His Excellency Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
Ms. Uzo Aduba, Actress, New York, NY
	            Ms. Nonyem Aduba
Ms. Mimi Alemayehou, Washington, DC
	            Mr. Papa Ndiaye
Her Excellency Amina Ali, Ambassador of the African Union Mission
His Excellency Abdalla Alteni, Prime Minister of the State of Libya
His Excellency Martin Andjaba, Ambassador of the Republic of Namibia
The Honorable Dennis Archer, Chairman and CEO, Dennis W. Archer PLLC, Detroit, MI
	            Mr. Dennis Archer, Jr.
The Honorable Caroline Atkinson, Deputy Assistant to the President & Deputy National Security Advisor for International Economics, National Security Council
	            Mr. Geoffrey Boyd Lamb
His Excellency Abdallah Baali, Ambassador of the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria
His Excellency Nassirou Bako Arifari, Minister of Foreign Affairs, African Integration, Francophonie and the Beninese Diaspora, Republic of Benin
His Excellency Oldemiro Marques Baloi, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Republic of Mozambique
Mr. Ajay Banga, President and CEO, Mastercard, Purchase, NY
	            Mrs. Ritu Banga
The Honorable Karen Bass, United States Representative (California)
	            Ms. Kim Hurley
His Excellency Yipènè Djibril Bassrole, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation, Burkina Faso
His Excellency Kalidu Bayo, Minister of Presidential Affairs, Republic of The Gambia
His Excellency Mohamed Bazoum, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, African Integration and Nigerians Abroad, Republic of Niger
The Honorable Joyce Beatty, United States Representative (Ohio)
	            Mr. Otto Beatty Jr.
Reverend David Beckmann, President, Bread for the World, Washington, DC
	            Mrs. Janet Williams Beckmann
His Excellency Abdirahman Beileh, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Investment, Federal Republic of Somalia
The Honorable Mr. William Bell, Birmingham, AL
	            Mrs. Sharon Bell
His Excellency Abdel-Ilah Benkiran, Head of Government of the Kingdom of Morocco
	            Mrs. Nabila Benkiran, Spouse of the Head of Government of the Kingdom of Morocco
Mr. Mayank Bhargava, Falls Church, VA
	            Ms. Namita Datta
Mr. Hunter Biden, Washington, DC
	            Mrs. Kathleen Biden
The Honorable Joseph R. Biden, Jr., Vice President of the United States
	            Dr. Jill Biden
His Excellency Paul Biya, President of the Republic of Cameroon
	            Mrs. Chantal Biya, First Lady of the Republic of Cameroon
The Honorable Tony Blinken, Assistant to the President and Deputy National Security Advisor, Office of the National Security Advisor
The Honorable Michael Bloomberg, Owner, Bloomberg, New York, NY
	            Ms. Diana Taylor
His Excellency Joseph Nyuma Boakai, Sr., Vice President of the Republic of Liberia
His Excellency Ali Bongo Ondimba, President of the Gabonese Republic
	            Mrs. Sylvia Bongo Ondimba, First Lady of the Gabonese Republic
The Honorable Dr. Arivn Boolell, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade, Republic of Mauritius
Mr. Joseph Brandt, New York, NY
	            Mrs. Carol Brandt
The Honorable Anita Breckenridge, Assistant to the President and Deputy Chief of Staff
	            Mr. Russell Breckenridge
The Honorable Lonnie Bunch III, Director, National Museum of African American History and Culture, Washington, DC
	            Ms. Roslyn Marable-Bunch
The Honorable William Burns, Deputy Secretary, U.S. Department of State
	            Ms. Lisa Ann Carty
The Honorable Sylvia Burwell, Secretary of Health and Human Services
	            Mr. Steve Burwell
Ms. Vanessa Bush, Editor in Chief, Essence, New York, NY
	            Ms. Tatsha Robertson
Ms. Kathy Calvin, President, UN Foundation, Washington, DC
	            Mr. John Calvin
The Honorable Johnnie Carson, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, U.S. Department of State
	            Mrs. Anne Carson
The Honorable President Jimmy Carter
The Honorable Dr. George Chaponda MP, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, Republic of Malawi
His Excellency George Rebelo Chicoti, Minister of External Relations, Republic of Angola
The Honorable Donna Christensen, Delegate to the United States House of Representatives, United States Virgin Islands
	            Mrs. Rabiah George
The Honorable William Lacy Clay, Jr., United States Representative (Missouri)
	            Mr. William L. Clay III
Dr. Johnnetta Betsch Cole, Director, National Museum of African Art, Washington, DC
	            Mr. James Staton, Jr.
His Excellency Blaise Compaoré, President of Burkina Faso
	            Mrs. Chantal Compaoré, First Lady of Burkina Faso
His Excellency Alpha Conde, President of the Republic of Guinea
	            Her Excellency Djene Kaba Conde, First Lady of the Republic of Guinea
The Honorable Maria Contreras-Sweet, Administrator, Small Business Administration
	            Mr. Raphael Sweet
The Honorable Christopher Coons, United States Senator (Delaware)
	            Mrs. Annie Coons
Ms. Helene Cooper, White House Correspondent, The New York Times, Alexandria, VA
	            Mr. Jonathan Karp
His Excellency Gabriel Arcanjo Ferreira da Costa, Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe
The Honorable Elijah Cummings, United States Representative (Maryland)
	            Dr. Maya Rockeymoore Cummings
Her Excellency Natalia Da Costa Umbelina Neto, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and Communities, Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe
Mr. Aliko Dangote, President/Chief Executive, Dangote Industries Ltd., Washington, DC
	            Ms. Halima Aliko-Dangote
The Honorable Brian Deese, Deputy Director, Office of Management and Budget
	            Mrs. Kara Deese
His Excellency Jorge Carlos de Almeida Fonseca, President of the Republic of Cabo Verde
	            Mrs. Lígia Arcângela Lubrino Dias Fonseca, First Lady of the Republic of Cabo Verde
The Honorable Bill de Blasio, Mayor, City of New York, NY
	            Ms. Chirlane McCray
Mr. Valentino Deng, Chicago, IL
	            Ms. Tiffanie De Bartolo
Ms. Grace Hightower DeNiro, New York, NY
	            Mr. Robert DeNiro
His Excellency Hailemariam Desalegn Boshe, Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
	            Her Excellency Roman Tesfaye, First Lady of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
 
His Excellency Ikililou Dhoinine, President of the Union of the Comoros
	            Her Excellency Hadidja Abubakar Ikililou Dhoinine, Spouse of the President of the Union of Comoros
His Excellency Abdoulaye Diop, Minister of Foreign Affairs, African Integration, and International Cooperation, Republic of Mali   
The Honorable Shaun Donovan, Director, Office of Management and Budget
	            Ms. Liza Gilbert
His Excellency Daniel Kablan Duncan, Prime Minister of the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire
The Honorable Donna Edwards, United States Representative (Maryland)
	            Ms. Selena Singleton
The Honorable Neil Eggleston, Assistant to the President and Counsel
	            Ms. Penda Hair
Mr. Chiwetel Ejiofor, Actor, New York, NY
	            Ms. Mmoma Ejifor
Mr. Michael Elliott, President and CEO, ONE, Washington, DC
	            Ms. Sipho Moyo
Mr. Tony Elumelu, Nigeria
	             Mr. Wiebe Boer
The Honorable Eliot Engel, United States Representative (New York)
	            Mrs. Patricia Engel
His Excellency Francois Fall, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Guineans Abroad, Republic of Guinea
The Honorable Katie Fallon, Assistant to the President and Director of Legislative Affairs
	            Mr. Brian Fallon, Jr.
Ms. Mbaye Fatimata, Washington, DC
	            Ms. Semhar Araia
The Honorable Chaka Fattah, United States Representative (Pennsylvania)
	            Mrs. Renee Chenault-Fattah
The Honorable Russ Feingold, Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, U.S. Department of State
	            Ms. Christine Ferdinand
The Honorable Dianne Feinstein, United States Senator (California)
	            Mr. Richard Blum
Mr. Jeffrey Fischer, Chairman, ADAS Group, LLC, Bethesda, MD
	            Mrs. Nicole Fischer
The Honorable Anthony Foxx, Secretary of Transportation
	            The Honorable Susan Kurland, Assistant Secretary for Aviation and International Affairs, U.S. Department of Transportation
The Honorable William H. Frist, Former Senator (Tennessee)
	            Ms. Tracy Roberts
The Honorable Michael Froman, Ambassador, United States Trade Representative
	            Ms. Behnaz Kibria
The Honorable Chief Mgwagwa Gamedze, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, Kingdom of Swaziland
Mr. Henry Louis Gates, Jr., Alphonse Fletcher University Professor, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
	            Mr. Lawrence Bobo
Dr. Helene Gayle, CEO, CARE, Atlanta, GA
	            Mr. Stephen Keith
Mr. Michael Gerson, Op-ed Columnist, The Washington Post, Alexandria, VA
	            Mrs. Dawn Gerson
Mr. Daniel Glickman, Senior Fellow, Bipartisan Policy Center, Washington, DC
	            Mrs. Rhoda Glickman, Director of Government Relations, Corporation for National and Community Service, Washington, DC
His Excellency Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé, President of the Republic of Togo
Mr. Jeff Gordon, Charlotte, NC
	            Ms. Ingrid Vandebosch
Mr. Peter Grauer, Chairman, Bloomberg, L.P., New York, NY
	            Ms. Meridith Webster, Director of Communications and Public Affairs, Bloomberg L.P.
The Honorable Al Green, United States Representative (Texas)
	            Mr. George Nwanguma
His Excellency Armando Emilio Guebuza, President of the Republic of Mozambique
	            Dr. Maria da Luz Dai Guebuza, First Lady of the Republic of Mozambique
His Excellency Ismail Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of Djibouti
Ms. Lulu Haangala, Charlottesville, VA
	           Ms. Martine Ekomo-Soignet
Her Excellency Mongi Hamdi, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Republic of Tunisia
The Honorable Grant Harris, Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for African Affairs, National Security Council
	           Mrs. Jasmine Harris
Ms. Patricia Harris, Chief Executive Officer, Bloomberg Philanthropies, New York, NY
	           Mr. Mark Lebow
His Excellency El-Anrif Said Hassane, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Union of the Comoros
Mr. Christopher Helm, James Campbell Matthews Distinguished Professor of Jurisprudence, Albany Law School, Albany, NY
	           Ms. Debra Toms-Helm
The Honorable Carrie Hessler-Radelet, Director, Peace Corps
	           Mr. Steven Charles Radelet
His Excellency Mohamed Lemine Heycen, Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
The Honorable Heather Higginbottom, Deputy Secretary of State for Management and Resources, U.S. Department of State
	           Ambassador Daniel Sepulveda
Mr. Paul Hinks, Board Chair, Corporate Council on Africa, Washington, DC
	           Ms. Julie Kurtzman
The Honorable Fred Hochberg, Chairman, Export-Import Bank
	           Mr. Thomas Healy, Chairman, J. William Fulbright Foreign Scholarship Board, U.S. Department of State
The Honorable Dana Hyde, CEO, Millennium Challenge Corporation, Cabin John, MD
	           Mr. Jonathan Chambers
Dr. Mo Ibrahim, Washington, DC
The Honorable Johnny Isakson, United States Senator (Georgia)
	           Mr. Christopher Sullivan
His Excellency Idriss Deby Itno, President of the Republic of Chad
	           Ms. Hinda Deby Itno, First Lady of the Republic of Chad
The Honorable Fred Mandir Jachan-Omach, Minister of State for Finance, Republic of Uganda
The Honorable Sheila Jackson-Lee, United States Representative (Texas)
	           Dr. Elwyn Lee
Bishop T.D. Jakes, Dallas, TX
	           Ms. Regina Renee Freeman-Lewis
His Excellency Yahya A.J.J. Jammeh, President of the Republic of The Gambia
	           Her Excellency Zineb Jammeh, First Lady of the Republic of The Gambia
The Honorable Valerie Jarrett, Senior Advisor and Assistant to the President for Intergovernmental Affairs and Public Engagement
	           Mr. Ahmad Rashad
The Honorable Hakeem Jeffries, United States Representative (New York)
	           Mrs. Kennysandra Jeffries
The Honorable Broderick D. Johnson, Assistant to the President and Cabinet Secretary
The Honorable Eddie Bernice Johnson, United States Representative (Texas)
	           The Honorable Rodney Ellis, Senator, Texas State Senate
The Honorable Hank Johnson, United States Representative
	           Mr. Arthur Sidney
The Honorable Jeh Johnson, Secretary of Homeland Security
Ms. Lorna Johnson, Beverly Hills, CA
	           Mr. Robert Black III
His Excellency Dr. Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
His Excellency Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Mr. Don Kaberuka, President, African Development Bank, Washington, DC
His Excellency Paul Kagame, President of the Republic of Rwanda
	            Ms. Ange Ingabire Kagame, Daughter of the President of the Republic of Rwanda
The Honorable Harry Kalaba, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Zambia
His Excellency Dr. Samura Kamara, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra Leone
His Excellency Laurent Kavakure, Minister of External Relations and International Cooperation, Republic of Burundi
Mr. Meb Keflezighi, San Diego, CA
	           Ms. Yordanos Asgedom
His Excellency Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, President of the Republic of Mali
	           Mrs. Keïta Aminata Maiga, First Lady of the Republic of Mali
The Honorable Robin Kelly, United States House of Representative (Illinois)
	           Ms. Madeleine Horn
Mr. Muhtar Kent, President and CEO, Coca Cola Company, Atlanta, GA
His Excellency Uhuru Kenyatta, President of the Republic of Kenya
The Honorable John Kerry, Secretary of State
Ms. Angelique Kidjo, Brooklyn, NY
	           Mr. Jean Hebrail
His Excellency Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete, President of the United Republic of Tanzania
	           Her Excellency Salma Kikwete, First Lady of the United Republic of Tanzania
Dr. Jim Kim, President, World Bank, Washington, DC
	           Dr. Younsook Lim
His Excellency Charles Koffi Diby, Senior Minister of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Côte d'Ivoire
Ms. Cina Anoka Lawson, Minister of Post and Digital Economy, Republic of Togo
Mr. Richard Leach, President and CEO, World Food Program USA, Washington, DC
	            Mrs. Susanne Leach
The Honorable Barbara Lee, United States Representative (California)
	            Mr. Craig Lee
Mr. Jack Leslie, Washington, DC
	            Ms. Caroline Pech
The Honorable Jack Lew, Secretary of the Treasury
The Honorable Elizabeth Littlefield, President, Overseas Private Investment Corporation
	            Mr. Matthew Arnold
His Excellency Mario Lopes da Rosa, Minister of Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and Communities of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
Mrs. Paula Madison, Chicago, IL
	            Ms. LaFleur Paysour
His Excellency John Dramani Mahama, President of the Republic of Ghana
	            Her Excellency Lordina Dramani Mahama, First Lady of the Republic of Ghana
His Excellency Issoufou Mahamadou, President of the Republic of Niger
His Excellency Ibrahim Roshdy Mahlab, Prime Minister of the Arab Republic of Egypt
Mr. Tshepo Mahloele, CEO, Harith General Partners, Washington, DC
	            Ms. Thenjiwe Vanda
Mr. Tracy Maitland, President, Advent Capital Management, New York, NY
	            Ms. Kimberley Hatchett
Mr. Darius Mans, Washington, DC
	            Mr. Stephen Cashin
Her Excellency Faida Maramuke MITIFU, Ambassador of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
His Excellency Dr. Mohamed Moncef Marzouki, President of the Republic of Tunisia
Mr. Strive Masiyiwa, Founder and Chairman, Global Telecommunications Group, Washington, DC
	            Mrs. Tsitsi Masiyiwa
His Excellency Salva Kiir Mayardit, President of the Republic of South Sudan
Bishop Vashti McKenzie, 10th Episcopal District of the AME Church, Dallas, TX
	            Mr. Stanley McKenzie
Mr. Doug McMillon, President and CEO, Wal-Mart, Bentonville, AR
	            Mrs. Shelley McMillon
The Honorable Gregory W. Meeks, United States Representative (New York)
	            Mrs. Simone-Marie Meeks
The Honorable Bernard K. Membe, MP, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, United Republic of Tanzania
The Honorable Robert Menendez, United States Senate (New Jersey)
	            Ms. Alicia Mucci
His Excellency James Alix Michel, President of the Republic of Seychelles
The Honorable Amina Mohamed, Cabinet Secretary for Foreign and International Trade, Republic of Kenya
His Excellency Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, President of the Federal Republic of Somalia
	            Mrs. Qamar Ali Omar, Spouse of the President of the Federal Republic of Somalia
His Excellency Agapito Mba Mokuy, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Republic of Equatorial Guinea
His Excellency Serge Mombouli, Ambassador of the Democratic Republic of Congo
The Honorable Ernest Moniz, Secretary of Energy
	            Ms. Katya Frois-Moniz
The Honorable Gwen Moore, United States Representative (Wisconsin)
	            Ms. Brenda L. Moore
Mr. Marc Morial, President, National Urban League, Maplewood, NJ
	            Ms. Michelle Miller
Mr. Patrice Motsepe, Washington, DC
	            Ms. Precious Moloi-Motsepe
His Excellency Pierre Moukoko Mbonjo, Minister of External Relations, Republic of Cameroon
His Excellency Mahamat Moussafaki. Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Chad
His Majesty King Mswati III, Kingdom of Swaziland
	            Her Royal Highness Inkhosikati La Mbikiza, Spouse of the King of Swaziland
Ms. Wanja Muguongo, Executive Director, UHAI – East African Sexual Health and Rights Initiative, Washington, DC
	            Ms. Lorna Dias
Dr. Denis Mukwege, Washington, DC
	            Ms. Madeleine Kaboyi
The Honorable Cecilia Muñoz, Assistant to the President and Director of the White House Domestic Policy Council
	            Mr. Amit A. Pandya
His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda
	            Mrs. Janet Musevini, First Lady of the Republic of Uganda
Her Excellency Louise Mushikiwabo, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Republic of Rwanda
His Excellency Arthur Peter Mutharika, President of the Republic of Malawi
	            Her Excellency Gertrude Hendrina Mutharika, First Lady of the Republic of Malawi
Ms. Wangechi Mutu, New York, NY
Dr. James Mwangi, Washington, DC
Mr. Morris Mbetsa Mwero, Notre Dame, IN
His Excellency Augustine Ngafuan, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Liberia
His Excellency Emmanuel Issozet Ngondet, Minister For Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation, and Regional Integration, Gabonese Republic
His Excellency Cheikh Niang, Ambassador of the Republic of Senegal
The Honorable Sheila Nix, Deputy Assistant to the President and Chief of Staff to Dr. Jill Biden
	            Mr. James Coughlin
Her Excellency Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, Minister of International Relations and Cooperation, Republic of South Africa
His Excellency Pierre Nkurunziza, President of the Republic of Burundi
	            Her Excellency Denise Bucumi, First Lady of the Republic of Burundi
The Honorable Eleanor Holmes Norton, Delegate to the United States House of Representatives, Washington, DC
Mr. Douglas Oberhelman, CEO, Caterpillar, Peoria, IL
	            Mrs. Diane Oberhelman
His Excellency Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
	            Her Excellency Constancia Mangue De Obiang, First Lady of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
His Excellency Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz, President of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
	            Mrs. Mariam Mint Ahmed Dit Tekber, Spouse of the President of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
Mrs. Valerie Owens, Kennett Square, PA
	            Ms. Missy Owens
The Honorable Jennifer Palmieri, Assistant to the President and Director of Communications
Ms. Yolanda Parker, Founder & President, KMS Software, Los Angeles, CA
	            Mr. Kevin Parker
The Honorable Donald Payne, Jr., United States Representative (New Jersey)
The Honorable Nancy Pelosi, United States House Democratic Leader (California)
	            Mr. Paul Pelosi
Mr. Michael Philipp, Chairman, Reykjavik Geothermal (RG), Amelia Island, FL
	            Mr. Mikael Andren
Mr. Macon Phillips III, Coordinator for the Bureau of International Information Programs, U.S. Department of State
	            Mrs. Emily Phillips
The Honorable John Podesta, Counselor to the President
	            Mrs. Mary Podesta
His Excellency Hifikepunye Lucas Pohamba, President of the Republic of Namibia
	            Ms. Penehupifo Pohamba, First Lady of the Republic of Namibia
The Honorable Samantha Power, Permanent Representative of the U.S. to the United Nations
	            Mr. Cass Sunstein
Mr. John Prendergast, Co-Founder, Enough Project, Washington, DC
	            Mrs. Sia Sanneh
The Honorable Penny Pritzker, Secretary of Commerce
	            Mr. Stefan Selig
His Excellency Hery Rajaonarimampianina, President of the Republic of Madagascar
	            Mrs. Voahangy Rajaonarimampianina, Spouse of the President of the Republic of Madagascar
The Honorable Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam, G.C.S.K., F.R.C.P., Prime Minister of the Republic of Mauritius
The Honorable Charles Rangel, United States Representative (New York)
	            Mrs. Alma Rangel
Her Excellency Arisoa Razafitrimo, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Madagascar
The Honorable Ben Rhodes, Assistant to the President, Deputy National Security Adviser for Strategic Communications & Speechwriting
	            Ms. Ann Norris
His Excellency Awan Andrew Goul RIAK, Minister in the Office of the President, Republic of South Sudan
The Honorable Susan Rice, Assistant to the President and National Security Advisor
	            Mr. Ian Cameron
His Excellency Jose Luis Rocha, Ambassador of the Republic of Cabo Verde
General David Rodriguez, Commander, United States Africa Command
	            Mrs. Ginny Rodriguez
Mrs. Virginia Rometty, CEO and President, International Business Machines, Armonk, NY
Mr. Jack Rosen, Chairman, American Jewish Congress, New York, NY
	            Mrs. Phyllis Rosen
The Honorable Edward Randall Royce, United States Representative (California)
	            Mrs. Marie Royce
Mr. David Rubenstein, Co-Founder and Co-CEO, The Carlyle Group, Washington, DC
The Honorable Bobby Rush, United States Representative (Illinois)
	            Mrs. Carolyn Rush
Ms. April Ryan, Washington Bureau Chief, American Urban Radio Networks, Randallstown, MD
	            Mr. Gerald Lopes
The Honorable Aggrey Tisa Sabuni, Minister of Finance and Economic Planning, Republic of South Sudan
His Excellency Macky Sall, President of the Republic of Senegal
	            Mrs. Marieme Sall, First Lady of the Republic of Senegal
His Excellency Denis Sassou N’Guesso, President of the Republic of Congo
Mr. Stephen Schwarzman, President, Chief Executive Officer, and Co-Founder, The Blackstone Group, New York, NY
	            Mr. Sean Klimczak
The Honorable Dr. Guy Scott, Vice President of the Republic of Zambia
	            Dr. Charlotte Harland Scott, Second Lady of the Republic of Zambia
His Excellency Eliachim Sebatane, Ambassador of the Kingdom of Lesotho
The Honorable Peter Selfridge, Chief of Protocol, U.S. Department of State
His Excellency Abdelmalek Sellal, Prime Minister of the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria
	            Mrs. Farida Sellal, Spouse of the Prime Minister of the People's Republic of Algeria
His Excellency Dr. Abubacarr Senghore, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Republic of The Gambia
Her Excellency Tebelelo Seretse, Ambassador of the Republic of Botswana
Ms. Isha Sesay, Anchor, CNN, Atlanta, GA
	            Mr. Leif Coorlim
The Honorable Terri Sewell, United States Representative (Alabama)
	            Mr. Jesse Wells, Jr.
The Honorable Rajiv J. Shah, Administrator, United States Agency for International Development
	            Mrs. Shivam Shah
The Honorable Wendy Sherman, Under Secretary for Political Affairs, U.S. Department of State
	            Mr. Bruce Stokes
The Honorable Phandu Tombola Skelemani, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic of Botswana
The Honorable Chris Smith, United States Representative (New Jersey)
	            Mrs. Marie Smith
The Honorable Gayle Smith, Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Development and Democracy, National Security Council
	            Mr. John Rice-Cameron
Mr. Arne Sorenson, President and CEO, J.W. Marriott International, Bethesda, MD
	            Mrs. Ruth Sorenson
The Honorable Margaret Spellings, President of the George W. Bush Presidential Center, Dallas, TX
	            Mr. Vance Wilson
Mr. Earl Stafford, CEO, Wentworth Group, McLean, VA
	            Mrs. Amanda Stafford
His Excellency Bockari Stevens, Ambassador of the Republic of Sierra Leone
Mr. Ritchie Tabachnick, President, Equipment & Controls Africa, Pittsburgh, PA
	            Ms. Laura Tabachnick
His Excellency Mohamed Mostafa Mohamed Tawfik, Ambassador of the Arab Republic of Egypt
The Honorable Tina Tchen, Assistant to the President and Chief of Staff to the First Lady
Mr. Tewolde Tesfaye, Ethiopia
	           Mr. Kagnew Asfaw
Her Excellency Hanna Tetteh, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration, Republic of Ghana
The Right Honorable Dr. Motsoahae Thomas Thabane, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Lesotho
The Honorable Linda Thomas-Greenfield, Assistant Secretary of State for the Bureau of African Affairs
	            Mr. Lafayette Greenfield
Mr. Sim Tshabalala, Washington, DC
His Excellency José Mário Vaz, President of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
	            Her Excellency Rosa Teixeira Goudiaby Vaz, First Lady of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
His Excellency Manuel Domingos Vicente, Vice President, Republic of Angola
The Honorable Tom Vilsack, Secretary, U.S. Department of Agriculture
	            Mrs. Christie Vilsack
The Honorable David Wade, Chief of Staff to the Secretary of State, U.S. Department of State
	           Ms. Elizabeth Alexander
The Honorable Aminu Bashir Wali, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Federal Republic of Nigeria
Mr. DeWayne Wickham, Baltimore, MD
	           Ms. Zenita Wickham Hurley
The Honorable Frederica Wilson, United States Representative (Florida)
	           Dr. Roslyn Artis
Mr. Phill Wilson, CEO, Black AIDS Institute, Los Angeles, CA
	           Mr. Mark Schoofs
His Excellency Boni Yayi, President of the Republic of Benin
Ms. Melike Yetken, Director of African Affairs, National Security Council
	           Mr. Jeffrey Krilla
His Excellency Mahamoud Ali Youssouf, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic of Djibouti
The Honorable Leocadia Zak, Director, United States Trade and Development Agency
	           Mr. Kenneth W Hansen
Mr. Jeffrey Zients, Assistant to the President and Director of the National Economic Council
	           Mrs. Mary Zients
Her Excellency Dr. Nkosazana Clarice Dlamini Zuma, Chairperson of the African Union Commission
His Excellency Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma, President of the Republic of South Africa
	           Mrs. Nompumelelo Primrose Zuma, Spouse of the President of the Republic of South Africa
Through the Doing Business in Africa (DBIA) Campaign, the U.S. government is strengthening its commercial relationship with the continent of Africa, a diverse region that offers substantial trade and investment opportunities across national and regional markets.  With a 5.4 percent growth rate predicted for 2014, Africa is outpacing global growth.  U.S. goods and services exports to Africa reached a record high of $50.2 billion in 2013, up 40 percent since 2009.  These exports supported 250,000 U.S. jobs. 
New Commitments to Significantly Expand the DBIA Campaign
At today’s U.S.-Africa Business Forum, President Obama announced $7 billion in new financing to promote U.S. exports to and investments in Africa under the DBIA Campaign.  U.S. companies announced new deals in clean energy, aviation, banking, and construction worth more than $14 billion, in addition to $12 billion in new commitments under the President’s Power Africa initiative from private sector partners, the World Bank, and the government of Sweden.  Taken together, these new commitments amount to more than $33 billion, supporting economic growth across Africa and tens of thousands of U.S. jobs.
The DBIA Campaign encourages U.S. commercial engagement in Africa by harnessing the resources of the U.S. government to assist businesses in identifying and seizing opportunities and to engage with members of the African Diaspora in the United States.  The DBIA Campaign, which was launched in November 2012, has four main objectives:


		Connect American Businesses with African Partners

		Support Existing and New American Investment in Africa

		Expand Access for American Businesses to Finance Their Exports to Africa

		Reduce Barriers to Trade and Investment in Africa

The U.S. government’s newly announced two-year commitments to support the DBIA Campaign are provided below. 
An Executive Order to Create a President’s Advisory Council on Doing Business in Africa
Today the President signed an Executive Order (E.O.) to promote broad-based economic growth in the United States and in Africa by encouraging U.S. companies to trade with and invest in Africa. 
The E.O. directs the Secretary of Commerce to establish a President’s Advisory Council on Doing Business in Africa that will be comprised of not more than 15 members from the private sector, including small business.  The Advisory Council will provide information, analysis, and recommendations to the President, through the Secretary of Commerce, including on developing strategies for creating jobs in the United States and Africa through trade and investment; developing strategies by which the U.S. private sector can identify and take advantage of trade and investment opportunities in Africa; and building lasting commercial partnerships between the U.S. and African private sectors.
New U.S. Government Resources to Support U.S. Exports and Investment in Africa
Interagency Initiatives


		The Principals of the Export-Import Bank of the United States (Ex-Im Bank), the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC), the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC), the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), and the U.S. Trade and Development Agency (USTDA) will mobilize private capital for Africa’s infrastructure through a series of at least three outcome-oriented roundtables in Africa that will advance project- and sector-specific investment opportunities and needed regulatory reforms.  These agencies will implement the initiative in coordination with DBIA Campaign agencies, African governments, and the U.S. and African private sectors.

		The U.S. Department of Commerce and USTDA launched the 20x20 Initiative to support a total of 20 trade and reverse trade missions by 2020, to promote U.S. industry engagement in Africa.  Working with federal, state, and local government partners, these missions will foster U.S. business partnerships with key African stakeholders.

		The Small Business Administration (SBA) and Ex-Im Bank will collectively support 50 DBIA Campaign-themed activities and outreach sessions over the next two years to facilitate U.S. trade finance, provide counseling and training on their programs, and conduct business development to support U.S. exporters, particularly small- and medium-sized enterprises.

U.S. Export-Import Bank


		Ex-Im Bank will commit up to $3 billion in financing to support U.S. exports to Africa over the next two years.  This is in addition to Ex-Im Bank’s existing commitments of $5 billion for Power Africa and a planned commitment of $1 billion to support U.S. exports in connection with new and ongoing Angolan infrastructure projects (through the Angolan Ministry of Finance).

		Ex-Im Bank will commit $563 million in financing to support the sale of General Electric locomotives to Transnet, South Africa’s largest integrated freight transport company. Major components of the locomotives will be manufactured at GE’s facilities in Erie, PA and Grove City, PA supporting an estimated 2,500 American jobs.

Millennium Challenge Corporation


		MCC will commit up to $2 billion in funding for new compacts in Africa that facilitate private sector-led economic growth and poverty reduction, creating potential opportunities for U.S. companies.  This commitment includes $498 million over the next five years to support the turnaround of Ghana’s electricity sector and stimulate private investment.  This Compact represents an example of the catalytic impact of Power Africa interventions which will help create the enabling environment to catalyze billions of dollars of private investment in Ghana.

		MCC will also lead its first ever investment mission to Africa to introduce U.S. businesses to the opportunities for investing in and around its Compacts.  In addition, MCC will hold at least eight Procurement Promotion sessions with U.S. companies to promote Compact contracting opportunities and developing five Trade and Investment Prospectuses, one for each new Compact in Africa, that outline the specific business opportunities that are expected to arise from MCC’s investments. 

Overseas Private Investment Corporation


		OPIC will commit up to $1 billion in financing and insurance support to catalyze private sector investments in Africa.  This is in addition to OPIC’s existing $1.5 billion Power Africa commitment.  OPIC reaffirmed its plan to place personnel on the ground in sub-Saharan Africa to help facilitate increased U.S. trade and investment and will support an investment mission to the region, with a focus on the power sector.

		OPIC will coordinate approximately a dozen U.S. government meetings on August 6, 2014, for U.S. and African private sector investors and project developers to discuss discrete transactions for financing support consideration to OPIC, as well as other DBIA investment agencies.

U.S. Trade and Development Agency (USTDA)


		USTDA, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Energy and U.S. Department of Transportation, hosted two African Leaders Visits in association with the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit.  These reverse trade missions highlighted the United States’ experience fostering economic growth through strategic infrastructure investments in the energy and transportation sectors. 

		USTDA announced it will partner with the Air Traffic and Navigation Services Company of South Africa to evaluate satellite-based automatic dependent surveillance-broadcast across the African continent, the implementation of which will improve air traffic safety and create over $100 million in U.S. export opportunities.

		USTDA reaffirmed its plan to have local representation in Nigeria for the first time.

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)


		USDA’s Commodity Credit Corporation will make available up to $1 billion in financing guarantees available for agricultural exports to Africa over the next two years.  USDA also will conduct outreach seminars to Africa in 2015 to promote the use of its credit guarantee program for the export of U.S. agricultural products.

U.S. Department of State


		The U.S. Department of State intends to commit $10 million toward the expansion of the U.S.-Africa Clean Energy Finance Initiative (US-ACEF), which aligns USTDA’s project planning expertise and OPIC’s financing and risk mitigation tools in new ways, to support private sector investment and increase support for U.S. businesses and exports in sub-Saharan Africa’s clean energy sector.

		The U.S. Department of State will sponsor a medical technology trade mission to sub-Saharan Africa led by a senior State Department official.

U.S. Department of Commerce


		The U.S. Department of Commerce reiterated its commitment to double its presence in sub-Saharan Africa by opening new offices in Angola, Tanzania, Ethiopia, and Mozambique, while expanding its operations in Ghana, and re-establishing a position at the African Development Bank. 

		The U.S. Department of Commerce will host its next Trade Winds Conference and Mission in Africa in 2015.  The Trade Winds program brings hundreds of U.S. companies to a region to hear about opportunities, meet one-on-one with Africa businesses, and get counseling from U.S. Commercial Service officers.  Past Trade Winds have been held in Asia and Latin America and resulted in over $100 million in deals at each event.

		The U.S. Department of Commerce launched a One-Stop-Shop website (www.trade.gov/DBIA) to offer American businesses and entrepreneurs a convenient instant access to critical African market information, financing tools available to them, projects to consider, key contacts, and much more.

		To celebrate the second anniversary of the DBIA Campaign, the U.S. Department of Commerce will host a “Discover Sub-Saharan Africa” conference in Atlanta on November 4-6, 2014.  Its Minority Business Development Agency (MBDA) will join the Constituency for Africa in hosting a “Doing Business in Africa” workshop in October to promote business and trade opportunities in Africa and resources for reaching the African marketplace.  MBDA also committed to host a U.S.-Africa Investors Forum on August 6, 2014, in association with the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit.

		Through its Global City Teams Program, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, in partnership with the U.S. private sector, will target at least 25 African metropolitan areas to join their counterparts worldwide in an interactive platform to accelerate smart city and smart grid goals.

U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID)


USAID will commit to a bond guarantee through its Development Credit Authority that will allow Dakar, Senegal, to issue the first ever non-sovereign backed municipal bond in sub-Saharan Africa outside of South Africa (with technical assistance support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation).  The guarantee will enable the city to raise $41.8 million on the regional stock exchange.  In addition, USAID guaranteed transactions are expected to mobilize $381 million in new private sector lending to small and medium enterprises across the continent. 

		USAID will launch the Africa Private Capital Group – a platform in South Africa to mobilize U.S., South African, and international private sector investment in key sectors to development, including agriculture, energy, trade, infrastructure, and health.

		USAID will upgrade its existing African Trade Hubs into “U.S.-African Trade and Investment Hubs” that will now create new opportunities for U.S. investment in and exports to Africa.  These hubs are located in Accra, Ghana, Nairobi, Kenya, and Gabarone, Botswana, and cover the West Africa, East Africa, and Southern Africa regions, respectively. 

		USAID will roll out its Benchmarking the Business of Agriculture (BBA) project this fall, to assesses the ease of doing business and investing in Africa’s agriculture. The BBA provides businesses worldwide with objective information on a country’s ease of doing business in agriculture.

U.S. Department of Transportation


		The U.S. Department of Transportation announced that Secretary Anthony Foxx will lead a transportation mission to Africa in early 2015, to discuss opportunities for improving regional connectivity, promoting safety and efficiency, and sharing best practices on increasing investment in transportation infrastructure.

		The U.S. Department of Transportation launched its Tomorrow’s Transportation Leaders initiative, which will include up to five workshops over the next two years to engage 100 young African transportation professionals on adopting U.S. best practices.  The workshops will address transportation policies and regulatory framework, transportation investment planning, and the efficient management of transportation systems.



		The U.S. Department of Transportation intends to direct $1 million toward strengthening civil aviation safety through the Safe Skies for Africa program.

U.S. Department of Energy


		The U.S. Department of Energy will support the “Clean Energy Solutions Center,” a multilateral initiative of the Clean Energy Ministerial to connect policymakers in Africa with clean energy experts and best practice resources.  The Clean Energy Solutions Center is a web-based resource that draws on knowledge from global experts to help governments design and adopt policies and programs that support the deployment of clean energy technologies.  Through the partnership, the Solutions Center will provide expert policy consultations free of charge to Power Africa countries in response to requests received.

Office of the United States Trade Representative


		On August 5, USTR signed at its headquarters a new Trade and Investment Framework Agreement with the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to provide a coordinated mechanism for engaging on trade and investment issues with the 15 West African countries that are part of ECOWAS.

On June 30, 2013, President Obama launched Power Africa, an innovative private sector-led initiative aimed at doubling electricity access in sub-Saharan Africa, where more than 600 million people currently lack access to electricity.  Power Africa set an ambitious initial goal of adding more than 10,000 megawatts (MW) of new, cleaner electricity generation capacity and increasing electricity access by at least 20 million household and business connections. 
Today, the President announced a renewed commitment to this initiative, and pledged a new level of $300 million in assistance per year to expand the reach of Power Africa across the continent in pursuit of a new, aggregate goal of 30,000 MW of additional capacity to Africa and increasing electricity access by at least 60 million household and business connections.  The President also announced $6 billion in new private sector commitments, bringing the total private sector commitments under Power Africa to date to more than $20 billion.  This includes additional commitments under Beyond the Grid, a new sub-initiative, announced at the June 2014 U.S-Africa Energy Ministerial, for fostering private investment in off-grid and small-scale energy solutions that seek to expand access to remote areas across sub-Saharan Africa.
Power Africa: Progress to Date
The U.S. Embassy teams have worked closely with their host governments and private sector partners to facilitate the financial closure of transactions that are expected to generate almost 2,800 megawatts (MW) of electricity, and Power Africa is actively supporting transactions expected to generate an additional 5,000 MW.  Once completed, these transactions will represent 78 percent of Power Africa’s initial 10,000 MW goal. 
Twelve U.S. government agencies, whose combined capabilities form the backbone of Power Africa, are working closely with African governments to prioritize and address key legal, regulatory and policy constraints to investment, and to implement measures that will sustain growth and enable successful governance of a growing power sector throughout sub-Saharan Africa.
Growing Private Sector Commitments in Support of Power Africa 
Private sector commitments to date are on track to meet Power Africa’s initial 10,000 MW goal and leading the path towards achieving the goal of doubling access to electricity in sub-Saharan Africa through private sector-led investments.
Notable transactions undertaken in the first year of the initiative include the ongoing negotiation of Corbetti Geothermal, the first phase of a potential 1,000 MW geothermal generation project and Ethiopia’s first independent power project; advancing nearly 500 MW of wind projects in Kenya; financial support for a 10 MW mini-hydro and a 5 MW solar project in Tanzania; and supporting power sector-wide privatization efforts in Nigeria.  Additional efforts include the U.S. African Development Foundation’s (USADF) Off-Grid Challenge. 
Leveraging Strategic Partnerships to Maximize Impact
Over the past year, Power Africa has forged strategic partnerships with African governments, multilateral institutions, donors, and the private sector.  These partnerships seek to align resources and capabilities, and coordinate our interventions to maximize our impact and accelerate private sector investment in renewable energy.


		         Although the goals set out by Power Africa are continent wide, the U.S. government signed memoranda of understanding (MOU) with the initial six focus countries, which reflect the strong commitment of African governments to engage in policy and regulatory reform. 

		         The World Bank Group will support Power Africa by committing $5 billion in new technical and financial support, including loans and guarantees, for energy projects in the six initial Power Africa focus countries.  This commitment builds on the World Bank's existing $3.3 billion commitment in the six focus countries and its broader commitment to developing the energy sector in sub-Saharan Africa.

		         The African Development Bank (AfDB) already announced its support to advance Power Africa as an anchor partner, with an initial commitment of $3 billion.  The AfDB has already approved approximately $670 million in support for energy sector operations in the six initial Power Africa countries, and expects to commit an additional $2 billion in support across sub-Saharan Africa over the coming year. 

		         President Obama welcomed the announcement that the Government of Sweden has committed $1 billion to advance Power Africa, including support for transmission and distribution upgrades, and the development of energy projects in sub-Saharan Africa. 

Power Africa Transaction–based Model at Work
During the U.S.-Africa Business Forum, a number of new Power Africa transactions and energy sector initiatives were highlighted: 


		         The U.S. Trade and Development Agency (USTDA) in partnership with the U.S. Department of Energy led the African Leaders’ Visit: Energy to Houston, Texas, where African decision makers met with government and industry leaders who highlighted their experience fostering economic growth through strategic investments energy infrastructure development.

		         The Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) approved up to $250 million in financing to support the development, construction, and operation of a 310 MW wind power project near Lake Turkana, Kenya.

		         OPIC also approved up to $50 million in financing for the Azura-Edo power plant, the first independent power producer in Nigeria in 10 years following recent power sector reforms.  This project is expected to provide up to 459 MW of much-needed power for Nigeria. 

		         Under the US-Africa Clean Energy Finance Initiative (ACEF), OPIC is supporting the Participatory Microfinance Group for Africa (“PAMIGA”), a network of 15 rural microfinance institutions to expand micro-lending for solar energy and clean water investments for agricultural and household use. 

		         Under ACEF, USTDA funded a study for Amahoro Energy to develop a new run-of-the-river hydropower plant and capacity upgrades at five existing plants, to create 11.45 MW of new generation capacity in Rwanda.

		         The USADF announced the selection of three awardees through the Liberia Off-Grid Challenge.  Each awardee will receive a $100,000 grant for Liberia off-grid projects jointly funded by USADF, GE, and USAID.

		         The Department of Commerce led an Energy Trade Mission including 19 U.S. companies to Ghana and Nigeria in May 2014, which resulted in the signing of $175 million in energy sector deals.

		      Ex-Im Bank approved a $17 million loan guarantee for BOAD, the West African Development Bank, to support long-term financing for the expansion of the Azito Power project in Cote d’Ivoire which will increase the plant’s installed capacity by 130 MW, from 290 MW to 420 MW, while reducing the carbon intensity per MW. 

Beyond the Grid Initiative
Recognizing that Power Africa cannot achieve energy access goals through the use of large grid extension projects alone, the U.S. government launched Beyond the Grid, a new Power Africa sub-initiative focused exclusively on unlocking investment and growth for off-grid and small-scale energy solutions on the African continent. Beyond the Grid will partner with more than 35 investors and practitioners that have committed to invest more than $1 billion into off-grid and small-scale solutions over the next five years.
Millennium Challenge Corporation Ghana Compact Signing
Secretary Kerry and the President Mahama of Ghana presided over the signing of a Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) Compact through which MCC will invest up to $498 million over the next five years to support the turnaround of Ghana’s electricity sector.  This compact represents an example of the catalytic impact of Power Africa interventions, which help create the enabling environment and stimulate private investment in order to meet the current and future needs of households and business while also ensuring inclusive access to power by its citizens, with up to $4 billion in potential commitments already in the pipeline.
U.S.-Africa Clean Energy Finance Initiative  
Secretary Kerry announced a second round of funding for ACEF, an innovative partnership launched two years ago among the State Department, OPIC, and USTDA that provides a small amount of early-stage funding to catalyze much larger private sector investment in clean energy projects in Sub-Saharan Africa.  To date, ACEF has supported more than 25 projects that have the potential to create hundreds of megawatts of new power generation capacity across ten African countries.  The new round of funding will allow this innovative effort to continue to leverage significant clean energy investment in Africa.
Commercial Law Development Program 
The Department of Commerce’s Commercial Law Development Program, through funding from USAID, is supporting the development of model legal frameworks, including annotated power purchase agreements, which accelerate the negotiation of renewable energy projects.
Clean Energy Solutions Center
The Department of Energy supported Clean Energy Solutions Center is connecting policymakers in Africa with a global clean energy experts through a web-based platform which aims to help African governments design and adopt policies and programs that support the deployment of clean energy technologies. 
Focus on Regional Initiatives to Support Power Trade and Geothermal Development
Through USAID, Power Africa is deploying Regional Transaction Advisors to address issues that cross national borders, including the development of regional power pools and advancing development of East Africa’s 15,000 MW in geothermal potential. 
Mandarin Oriental Hotel
	Washington, D.C.
3:20 P.M. EDT
THE PRESIDENT:   Thank you so much.  Thank you.  Please be seated.  Well, good afternoon, everybody.  To Mayor Bloomberg, thank you -- not only for the kind introduction, but to Bloomberg Philanthropies as our co-host, and for the great work that you’re doing across Africa to help create jobs, and promote public health, encourage entrepreneurship, especially women.  So thank you very much, Michael, for your leadership.  I want to thank our other co-host -- my great friend and tireless Commerce Secretary, Penny Pritzker.  (Applause.)  
I want to welcome all of our partners who are joining us from across Africa -- heads of state and government, and let me welcome the delegations from Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea, with whom we are working so urgently to control the Ebola outbreak and whose citizens are in our thoughts and prayers today.  I also want to welcome Madame Chairperson Dlamini-Zuma of the African Union Commission; President of the African Development Bank, Donald Kaberuka; as well as the President of the World Bank, Dr. Jim Kim.  Please give them all a round of applause.  (Applause.) 
And I want to acknowledge members of Congress who are here and who are such great champions of Africa’s engagement with -- America’s engagement with Africa.  In a city that does not always agree on much these days, there is broad bipartisan agreement that a secure, prosperous and self-reliant Africa is in the national interest of the United States.
And most of all, I want to thank all of you -- the business leaders, the entrepreneurs both from the United States and from across Africa who are creating jobs and opportunity for our people every day.  And I want to acknowledge leaders from across my administration who, like Penny, are your partners, including our U.S. Trade Representative, Mike Froman; USAID Administrator Raj Shah; and our new head of the Millennium Challenge Corporation, Dana Hyde; President of the Export-Import Bank, Fred Hochberg; Director of the U.S. Trade and Development Agency, Lee Zak; and our President and CEO of OPIC, Elizabeth Littlefield. 
So we are here, of course, as part of the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit -- the largest gathering any American President has ever hosted with African heads of state and government.  And this summit reflects a perspective that has guided my approach to Africa as President.  Even as Africa continues to face enormous challenges, even as too many Africans still endure poverty and conflict, hunger and disease, even as we work together to meet those challenges, we cannot lose sight of the new Africa that’s emerging.
We all know what makes Africa such an extraordinary opportunity.  Some of the fastest-growing economies in the world.  A growing middle class.  Expanding sectors like manufacturing and retail.  One of the fastest-growing telecommunications markets in the world.  More governments are reforming, attracting a record level of foreign investment.  It is the youngest and fastest-growing continent, with young people that are full of dreams and ambition. 
Last year in South Africa, in Soweto, I held a town hall with young men and women from across the continent, including some who joined us by video from Uganda.  And one young Ugandan woman spoke for many Africans when she said to me, “We are looking to the world for equal business partners and commitments, and not necessarily aid.  We want to do [business] at home and be the ones to own our own markets.”  That’s a sentiment we hear over and over again.  When I was traveling throughout Africa last year, what I heard was the desire of Africans not just for aid, but for trade and development that actually helps nations grow and empowers Africans for the long term.
As President, I’ve made it clear that the United States is determined to be a partner in Africa’s success -- a good partner, an equal partner, and a partner for the long term.  (Applause.)  We don’t look to Africa simply for its natural resources; we recognize Africa for its greatest resource, which is its people and its talents and their potential.  (Applause.)  We don’t simply want to extract minerals from the ground for our growth; we want to build genuine partnerships that create jobs and opportunity for all our peoples and that unleash the next era of African growth.  That’s the kind of partnership America offers.
And since I took office, we’ve stepped up our efforts across the board.  More investments in Africa; more trade missions, like the one Penny led this year; and more support for U.S. exports.  And I’m proud -- I’m proud that American exports to Africa have grown to record levels, supporting jobs in Africa and the United States, including a quarter of a million good American jobs.
But here’s the thing:  Our entire trade with all of Africa is still only about equal to our trade with Brazil -- one country.  Of all the goods we export to the world, only about one percent goes to Sub-Saharan Africa.  So we’ve got a lot of work to do.  We have to do better -- much better.  I want Africans buying more American products.  I want Americans buying more African products.  I know you do, too.  And that’s what you’re doing today.  (Applause.)
So I’m pleased that in conjunction with this forum, American companies are announcing major new deals in Africa.  Blackstone will invest in African energy projects.  Coca-Cola will partner with Africa to bring clean water to its communities.  GE will help build African infrastructure.  Marriott will build more hotels.  All told, American companies -- many with our trade assistance -- are announcing new deals in clean energy, aviation, banking, and construction worth more than $14 billion, spurring development across Africa and selling more goods stamped with that proud label, “Made in America.”
And I don’t want to just sustain this momentum, I want to up it.  I want to up our game.  So today I’m announcing a series of steps to take our trade with Africa to the next level.
First, we’re going to keep working to renew the African Growth and Opportunity Act -- and enhance it.  (Applause.)  We still do the vast majority of our trade with just three countries -- South Africa, Nigeria and Angola.  It’s still heavily weighted towards the energy sector.  We need more Africans, including women and small- and medium-sized businesses, getting their goods to market.  And leaders in Congress -- Democrats and Republicans -- have said they want to move forward.  So I’m optimistic we can work with Congress to renew and modernize AGOA before it expires, renew it for the long term.  We need to get that done.  (Applause.)
Second, as part of our “Doing Business in Africa” campaign, we’re going to do even more to help American companies compete.  We’ll put even more of our teams on the ground, advocating on behalf of your companies.  We’re going to send even more trade missions.  Today, we’re announcing $7 billion in new financing to promote American exports to Africa.  Earlier today, I signed an executive order to create a new President’s advisory council of business leaders to help make sure we’re doing everything we can to help you do business in Africa.  (Applause.)
And I would be remiss if I did not add that House Republicans can help by reauthorizing the Export-Import Bank.  That is the right thing to do.  (Applause.)  I was trying to explain to somebody that if I’ve got a Ford dealership and the Toyota dealership is providing financing to anybody who walks in the dealership and I’m not, I’m going to lose business.  It’s pretty straightforward.  We need to get that reauthorized.  (Applause.)  And you business leaders can help make clear that it is critical to U.S. business. 
Number three, we want to partner with Africa to build the infrastructure that economies need to flourish.  And that starts with electricity, which most Africans still lack.  That’s why last year while traveling throughout the continent, I announced a bold initiative, Power Africa, to double access to electricity in Sub-Saharan Africa and help bring electricity to more than 20 million African homes and businesses. 
Now, we’ve joined with African governments, the African Development Bank, and the private sector -- and I will tell you, the response has exceeded our projections.  It has been overwhelming.  Already, projects and negotiations are underway that, when completed, will put us nearly 80 percent of the way toward our goal.  On top of the significant resources we’ve already committed, I’m announcing that the United States will increase our pledge to $300 million a year for this effort. 
And as of today -- including an additional $12 billion in new commitments being announced this week by our private sector partners and the World Bank and the government of Sweden -- we’ve now mobilized a total of more than $26 billion to Power Africa just since we announced it -- $26 billion.  (Applause.)  So today we’re raising the bar.  We decided we’re meeting our goal too easily, Zuma, so we’ve got to go up.  So we’re tripling our goal, aiming to bring electricity to more than 60 million African homes and businesses that can spark growth for decades to come.  (Applause.)
Fourth, we’ll do more to help Africans trade with each other, because the markets with the greatest potential are often the countries right next door.  And it should not be harder to export your goods to your neighbor than it is to export those goods to Los Angeles or to Amsterdam.  (Applause.)  So through our Trade Africa initiative, we’ll increase our investments to help our African partners build their own capacity to trade, to strengthen regional markets, make borders more efficient, modernize the customs system.  We want to get African goods moving faster within Africa, as well as outside of Africa.
And finally, we’re doing more to empower the next generation of African entrepreneurs and business leaders -- it’s young men and women, like our extraordinary Mandela Washington Fellows that I met with last week.  And I have to say to the heads of state and government, you would have been extraordinarily proud to meet these young people who exhibit so much talent and so much energy and so much drive. 
With new Regional Leadership Centers and online courses, we’re going to offer training and networking for tens of thousands of young entrepreneurs across Africa. New grants will help them access the capital they need to grow.  Our annual Global Entrepreneurship Summit this year will be held in Morocco.  Next year, it will be held for the first time in Sub-Saharan Africa -- because we want to make sure that all that talent is tapped and they have access to the capital and the networks and the markets that they need to succeed.  Because if they succeed, then the countries in which they live will succeed.  They’ll create jobs.  They’ll create growth.  They’ll create opportunity.
So the bottom line is the United States is making a major and long-term investment in Africa’s progress.  And taken together, the new commitments I’ve described today -- across our government and by our many partners -- total some $33 billion.  And that will support development across Africa and jobs here in the United States.  Up to tens of thousands of American jobs are supported every time we expand trade with Africa. 
As critical as all these investments are, the key to unlocking the next era of African growth is not going to be here in the United States, it’s going to be in Africa.  And so, during this week’s summit, we’ll be discussing a whole range of areas where we’re going to have to work together -- areas that are important in their own right, but which are also essential to Africa’s growth. 
Capital is one thing.  Development programs and projects are one thing.  But rule of law, regulatory reform, good governance -- those things matter even more, because people should be able to start a business and ship their goods without having to pay a bribe or hire somebody’s cousin.
Agricultural development is critical because it’s the best way to boost incomes for the majority of Africans who are farmers, especially as they deal with the impacts of climate change. 
Rebuilding a strong health infrastructure, especially for mothers and children, is critical because no country can prosper unless its citizens are healthy and strong, and children are starting off with the advantages they need to grow to their full potential. 
And we’re going to have to talk about security and peace, because the future belongs to those who build, not those who destroy.  And it’s very hard to attract business investment, and it’s very hard to build infrastructure, and it’s very hard to sustain entrepreneurship in the midst of conflict.
So I just want to close with one example of what trade can help us build together.  Kusum Kavia was born in Kenya; her family was originally from India.  Eventually, she emigrated to the United States and along with her husband started a small business in California.  It started off as a small engineering firm.  Then it started manufacturing small power generators.  With the help of the Export-Import Bank -- including seminars and a line of credit and risk insurance -- they started exporting power generators to West Africa.  In Benin, they helped build a new electric power plant.
And it’s ended up being a win-win for everybody.  It’s been a win for their company, Combustion Associates, because exports to Africa have boosted their sales, which means they’ve been able to hire more workers here in the United States.  They partner with GE; GE is doing well.  Most of their revenues are from exports to Africa.  It’s been a win for their suppliers in Texas and Ohio and New York.  It’s been a win for Benin and its people, because more electricity for families and businesses, jobs for Africans at the power plant because the company hires locally and trains those workers.  And they hope to keep expanding as part of our Power Africa initiative. 
So this is an example of just one small business.  Imagine if we can replicate that success across our countries. 
Kusum says, “When our customers see the label, ‘Made in America,’ when they see our flag, it puts us above all the competition.”  And her vision for their company is the same vision that brings us all here today.  She says, “We really want to have a long-term partnership with Africa.”  So Kusum is here.  I had a chance to meet her backstage.  Where is she?  Right there.  Stand up, Kusum.  So she’s doing great work.  Thank you so much.  (Applause.)
But she’s an example of what’s possible -- a long-term partnership with Africa.  And that’s what America offers.  That’s what we’re building.  That’s the difference we can make when Africans and Americans work together.  So let’s follow Kusum’s lead.  Let’s do even more business together.  Let’s tear down barriers that slow us down and get in the way of trade.  Let’s build up the infrastructure -- the roads, the bridges, the ports, the electricity -- that connect our countries.  Let’s create more and sell more and buy more from each other.  I’m confident that we can.  And when we do, we won’t just propel the next era of African growth, we’ll create more jobs and opportunity for everybody -- for people here in the United States and for people around the world.  
So thank you very much, everybody, for what so far has been an outstanding session.  And I’ve got the opportunity to speak to this young man.  (Applause.)
Q    So thank you very much, Mr. President for this opportunity.  I’ll start by wishing you a belated Happy Birthday.
THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you. 
Q    Thank you very much.  (Laughter.) 
THE PRESIDENT:  Have you introduced yourself to everybody?
Q    I wanted to really jump into the issues.  (Laughter.) 
THE PRESIDENT:  Yes, go ahead and introduce yourself. 
Q    All right.  I’m Takunda Chingonzo.  I’m a young entrepreneur.  I’m 21.  I’m from Zimbabwe.  And I’m working in the wireless technology space.  We’re essentially liberating the Internet for Zimbabweans.  (Applause.) 
THE PRESIDENT:  And let me just -- this is an example of our young African leaders; in fact, the youngest young African leader.  But one thing I will say, though, if you’re going to promote your business, you’ve got to make sure to let people know who you are.  (Laughter.)
Q    Definitely, definitely.
THE PRESIDENT:  Just a little tip. 
Q    Definitely.
THE PRESIDENT:  You can’t be shy, man.  (Laughter.)  Please, go ahead.
Q    That’s correct, Mr. President.  So I was really going to start by delving into a personal experience.  I was going to get to my business and how I got to where we are.
So as I was saying, we’re working in the technology space.  I’m working on my third startup -- it’s called Saisai.  We’re creating Zimbabwe’s first free Internet-access network, hence liberating the Internet.  So in our working, we came to a point in time where we needed to import a bit of technology from the United States, and so we were engaging in conversation with these U.S.-based businesses.  And the response that we got time and time again was that unfortunately we cannot do business with you because you are from Zimbabwe.  And I was shocked -- this doesn’t make sense.
And so this is the exact same experience that other entrepreneurs that are in Zimbabwe have gone through, even through the meetings that I’ve had here.  You know, you sit down with potential investors, you talk about the project, the outlook, the opportunity, the growth and all that -- and they’re excited, you can see.  All systems are firing, right?  And then I say I’m from Zimbabwe and they look at me and they say, young man, this is a good project, very good, very good, but unfortunately we cannot engage in business with you.
And I understand that the sanctions that we have -- that are imposed on entities in Zimbabwe, these are targeted sanctions, right?  But then we have come to a point in time where we as young Africans are failing to properly engage in business with U.S.-based entities because there hasn’t been that clarity.  These entities believe that Zimbabwe is under sanctions.  So what really can we do to do try and clarify this to make sure that we as the young entrepreneurs can effectively develop Africa and engage in business?
THE PRESIDENT:  Well, obviously, the situation in Zimbabwe is somewhat unique.  The challenge for us in the United States has been how do we balance our desire to help the people of Zimbabwe with what has, frankly, been a repeated violation of basic democratic practices and human rights inside of Zimbabwe.
And we think it is very important to send clear signals about how we expect elections to be conducted, governments to be conducted -- because if we don’t, then all too often, with impunity, the people of those countries can suffer.  But you’re absolutely right that it also has to be balanced with making sure that whatever structures that we put in place with respect to sanctions don’t end up punishing the very people inside those countries. 
My immediate suggestion -- and this is a broader point to all the African businesses who are here, as well as the U.S. businesses -- is to make sure that we’re using the Department of Commerce and the other U.S. agencies where we can gather groups of entrepreneurs and find out exactly what can be done, what can’t be done, what resources are available.  It may be that you and a group of entrepreneurs in Zimbabwe are able to meet with us and propose certain projects that allow us to say this is something that will advance as opposed to retard the progress for the Zimbabwean people.
So what I’d suggest would be that we set up a meeting and we find out what kinds of things that the young entrepreneurs of Zimbabwe want to do, and see if there are ways that we can work with you consistent with the strong message that we send about good governance in Zimbabwe.
Q    I see.  Because really -- the point of emphasis really is that as young Africans we want to converse with other business entities here in the U.S., and if these sanctions are really targeted, then in honest truth, they aren’t supposed to hamper the business that we’re trying to engage in, the development that we’re talking about.
THE PRESIDENT:  Well, let’s see if we can refine them further based on some of the things you’re talking about.
Q    That’s all right.  Now, there have been a good number of investments that have been announced here -- multibillion-dollar investments in Africa -- and we’re really excited.  And there’s been a lot of talk about how the public and private partnerships are the vehicle through which this investment will come into Africa, but I really want to bring it to a point of clarity.  I believe that the private sector is stratified in itself.  We have the existing indigenous businesses in these countries that you’re hoping to invest in, and this is where usually the funding comes through -- the partnerships and all that.  That is well and fine.
But then, underneath that, we have these young, upcoming entrepreneurs -- the innovators, those that come up with products and services that disrupt the industry.  And this is the innovation that we want in Africa, to build products by Africans for Africans.  But in most cases, in what we have seen over the past years, is that, indeed, this investment comes through but it never cascades down to these young entrepreneurs, the emerging businesses.  And so the existing businesses then form a sort of ceiling which we cannot break through.
When it comes to investment, when you’re talking about solving unemployment, I believe that it’s more realistic to assume and understand that the probability of 10 startups employing 10 people in a given time period, it’s more realistic than one indigenous company employing 100 people. 
So what really has been -- or rather, has there been any consideration in these deals that have been structured in the investments that you announced to cater for the young entrepreneur who is trying to innovate to solve the problems in society?
THE PRESIDENT:  Well, first of all, I think for the business leaders who are here, both African and U.S., it’s hard being a startup everywhere.
Q    That’s true.
THE PRESIDENT:  Part of what you’re describing is typical of business around the world:  Folks who are already in, they don’t necessarily want to share.  They don’t want to be disrupted.  If there’s a good opportunity, they’d rather do it themselves.  If they see a small up-and-coming hotshot who might disrupt their business, they may initially try to block you or they may try to buy you out.  And getting financing for a startup is always going to be difficult.  You hear that from entrepreneurs here in the U.S. as well.
Having said that, what is absolutely true is that as we think about the billions of dollars that we’re mobilizing, we want to make sure that small businesses, medium-size businesses, women-owned businesses -- that they have opportunity.  And so my instructions to all of our agencies and hopefully the work that we're doing with all of our partners is how can we identify, target financing for the startup; how can we identify and link up U.S. companies with small and medium-size businesses and not just the large businesses?  And I think you are absolutely right that by us trying to spread investment, not narrowly through one or two companies but more broadly, that the opportunities for success in those countries are higher, and it also creates a healthy competition.
And that's true also in terms of how we're designing – for example, our Feed the Future program, which is working with almost 2 million small farmers inside of Africa.  When I was in Senegal, I met with a woman, maybe in her 30s; she had a small plot of land initially.  Through the Feed the Future program, she had been able to mechanize, double her productivity.  By doubling her productivity and, through a smartphone, getting better prices to the market, she was able to increase her profits.  Then she bought a tractor.  Then she doubled her productivity again.  And suddenly what had started off as just a program to increase her income had become capital for a growing business where she was now hiring people in her area and doing some of the process of the grain that she grew herself, so that she could move up the value chain.
There are entrepreneurs like that all across Africa.  Sometimes the capital they need is not very large.  Sometimes it's a fairly modest amount.  And so what I want to do is to make sure that we are constantly looking out for opportunities to disburse this capital not just narrowly, but broadly.  And one of the things that I hope happens with U.S. companies is that they’re constantly looking for opportunities to partner with young entrepreneurs, startups, and not just always going to the same well-established businesses.
Now, there are going to be some large-capital projects where you’ve got a good, solid, established company.  Hopefully they, themselves, have policies with respect to their suppliers that allow them to start encouraging and growing small businesses as well.
Q    Exactly.  And on that note, I'm glad that you acknowledged that and I hope that even in these deals, in the investments that you're talking about, that one of the conditions be that those large organizations that are getting investment have policies that cascade down to people at the grassroots.
You spoke about this lady who was using a smartphone to -- it is one key issue that is really propelling business and development in Africa, the ability to leverage technology.  And really it is all about the Internet of things.  And that is why I'm personally working in liberating the Internet to get more people connected. 
Now, this is a huge opportunity in Africa as well.  Now, there is this troubling issue that has been brought to our attention with entities and organizations that have come up and have said we want to control the Internet, we want to see who gets what traffic and from whom.  And policies and activities like that become challenges for startups that are trying to leverage the Internet, for this lady farmer that you talked about who is trying to leverage and get information from the Internet.
So I want to understand what is your stance on net neutrality and its effects on the global development in Africa?
THE PRESIDENT:  Well, this is an important issue for all the heads of state and government not just in Africa but around the world.  The reason the Internet is so powerful is because it's open.  My daughters, 16 and 13, they can access information from anyplace in the world.  They can learn about a particular discipline instantaneously, in ways that when I was their age -- first of all, I wasn’t as motivated as they are.  I was lazier than them.  (Laughter.)  They do much better in school than I did.  But the world is at their fingertips. 
And what facilitates that, and what has facilitated the incredible value that's been built by companies like Google and Facebook and so many others, all the applications that you find on your smartphone, is that there are not restrictions, there are not barriers to entry for new companies who have a good idea to use this platform that is open to create value.  And it is very important I think that we maintain that.
Now, I know that there’s a tension in some countries -- their attitude is we don't necessarily want all this information flowing because it can end up also being used as a tool for political organizing, it can be used as a tool to criticize the government, and so maybe we’d prefer a system that is more closed.  I think that is a self-defeating attitude.  Over the long term, because of technology, information, knowledge, transparency is inevitable.  And that's true here in the United States; it's true everywhere.
And so what we should be doing is trying to maintain an open Internet, trying to keep a process whereby any talented person who has an idea can suddenly use the Internet to disperse information.  There are going to be occasional tensions involved in terms of us monitoring the use of the Internet for terrorist networks or criminal enterprises or human trafficking.  But we can do that in ways that are compatible with maintaining an open Internet.
And this raises the broader question that I mentioned earlier, which is Africa needs capital; in some cases, Africa needs technical assistance; Africa certainly needs access to markets.  But perhaps the biggest thing that Africa is going to need to unleash even more the potential that's already there and the growth that's already taking place is laws and regulations and structures that empower individuals and are not simply designed to control or empower those at the very top. 
And the Internet is one example.  You’ve got to have a system and sets of laws that encourage entrepreneurship, but that's also true when it comes to a whole host of issues.  It's true when it comes to how hard is it to get a business permit when a new startup like yours wants to establish itself.
When it comes to Power Africa, there are billions of dollars floating around the world that are interested in investing in power generation in Africa.  And the countries that are going to attract that investment are the ones where the investor knows that if a power plant is built, that there are rules in place that are transparent that ensure that they’re going to get a decent return, and that some of the revenue isn't siphoned off in certain ways so that the investor has political risks or risks with respect to corruption. 
The more that governments set up the right rules, understanding that in the 21st century the power that drives growth and development and the marketplace involves knowledge and that can't be controlled, the more successful countries are going to be.
Q    I see.  So just to clarify on the issue of net neutrality, you are advocating for an open and fair Internet --
THE PRESIDENT:  Yes.
Q    -- which would -- then it has structure to ensure that the platform itself isn't abused.
THE PRESIDENT:  Well, there are two issues -- net neutrality -- in the United States, one of the issues around net neutrality is whether you are creating different rates or charges for different content providers.  That's the big controversy here.  You have big, wealthy media companies who might be willing to pay more but then also charge more for more spectrum, more bandwidth on the Internet so they can stream movies faster or what have you.
And I personally -- the position of my administration, as well as I think a lot of companies here is you don’t want to start getting a differentiation in how accessible the Internet is to various users.  You want to leave it open so that the next Google or the next Facebook can succeed. 
There’s another problem, though -- there are other countries -- and I think this is what you were alluding to -- that feel comfortable with the idea of controlling and censoring Internet content in their home countries, and setting up rules and laws about what can or cannot be on the Internet.  And I think that that not only is going to inhibit entrepreneurs who are creating value on the Internet; I think it’s also going to inhibit the growth of the country generally, because closed societies that are not open to new ideas, eventually they fall behind.  Eventually, they miss out on the future because they’re so locked into trying to maintain the past.
Q    I see.  Thank you for the clarity.  I think we’re out of a bit of time.  I’ll ask my final question.  When we began this conversation, we were alluding to the fact that -- the need to separate the political function and economic function.  In other words, politics should not get in the way of business.  And I’ve gone to quite a good number of -- I know it’s difficult -- so I’ve gone to a good number of conferences where the end deliverable of the entire summit, or whatever it is, is that we need to lobby government to create policies that are conducive, and this and that.  And that’s usually what you get -- either you’re trying to lobby somebody to do something, right?  And, in turn, governments come up and say, yes, we promise to come up with this and that, and this and that.  And that’s a whole political sphere of things.  My question is, apart from that, what can we as business leaders, as the private sector, what can we do sort of independently to -- what can we do to create this economic environment that fosters for the growth and development of Africa as a continent?
THE PRESIDENT:  Well, look, although this isn’t always a popular position here in Washington these days, the truth is, is that government really can help set the conditions and the framework for markets to function effectively -- in part because governments are able to initiate projects like roads and bridges and airports that any individual business would find cost prohibitive.  It wouldn’t make sense to invest in what is a collective good; it’s not going to help your bottom line if everybody else is using it.  So that’s part of the function of government.
Part of the function of government is to educate a population so that you got a well-trained workforce.  It’s hard for companies to invest in doing that by themselves.  There are certain common goods, like maintaining clean air and clean water, and making sure that if you have capital markets, that they’re well-regulated so that they’re trust-worthy, and small investors and large investors know that if they invest in a stock that they’re not being cheated. 
So there are a whole host of functions that government has to play.  But in the end, what drives innovation typically is not what happens in government, it’s what’s happening in companies.  And what we found in the United States is, is that companies, once they’ve got the basic rules and they’ve got the basic platform, they are able to create value and innovation and cultures that encourage growth.  And I think that African entrepreneurs are going to be the trendsetters for determining how societies think about themselves and, ultimately, how governments think about these issues.
The truth of the matter is, is that if you have big, successful companies or you’ve got widespread entrepreneurship, and you have a growing middle class and practices have been established in terms of fair dealing, and treating your workers properly, and extending opportunity to smaller contractors, and promoting women and making sure women are paid like men -- suddenly, what happens is businesses create new norms and new sensibilities.  And governments oftentimes will respond. 
And so I think in Africa what I’d like to see more and more of is partnerships between American businesses, between African businesses.  Some of the incredible cultures of some of our U.S. businesses that do a really good job promoting people and maintaining a meritocracy, and treating women equally, and treating people of different races and faiths and sexual orientations fairly and equally, and making sure that there are typical norms of how you deal with people in contracts and respect legal constraints -- all those things I think can then take root in a country like Zimbabwe or any other country.  Hopefully, governments are encouraging that, not inhibiting that.  They recognize that that’s how the world as a whole is increasingly moving in that direction.  And over time, you will see an Africa that is driven by individual entrepreneurs and private organizations, and governments will be responsive to their demands. 
So I think the one thing I want to make sure people understand, though, is it’s not an either/or issue.  Government has a critical role to play.  The marketplace has a critical role to play.  Nonprofit organizations have a critical role to play.  But the goal and the orientation constantly should be how do we empower individuals to work together.  And if we are empowering young people like you all across Africa, if we’ve got a 21-year-old who has already started three businesses, we’ve got to figure out how to invest in him, how to make it easier for him to succeed.  If you succeed, you’re going to then be hiring a whole bunch of people, and they, in turn, will succeed.  And that’s been the recipe for growth in the 20th century and the 21st century. 
And I’m confident that Africa is well on its way.  America just wants to make sure that we’re helpful in that process.  And I know that all the U.S. companies who are here, that’s their goal as well.  We are interested in Africa, because we know that if Africa thrives and succeeds, and if you’ve got a bunch of entrepreneurs, they’re going to need supplies from us maybe, or they may supply us with outstanding products; they’re going to have a growing middle class that wants to buy iPhones or applications from us.  In turn, they may provide us new services and we can be the distributor for something that’s invented in Africa, and all of us grow at the same time. 
That’s our goal, and I’m confident that we can make it happen.  And this summit has been a great start.  So I want to thank you for doing a great job moderating.  I want to thank all the leaders here not only of government, but also business for participating.  There’s been great energy, great enthusiasm.  I know a lot of business has gotten done.  If any of you are interested in investing in this young man, let him know.  (Laughter.) 
All right, thank you, guys. 
END
	4:05 P.M. EDT
