EXECUTIVE ORDER
-------
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PRESIDENT'S
TASK FORCE ON 21ST CENTURY POLICING
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to identify the best means to provide an effective partnership between law enforcement and local communities that reduces crime and increases trust, it is hereby ordered as follows:
Section 1. Establishment. There is established a President's Task Force on 21st Century Policing (Task Force).
Sec. 2. Membership.
(a) The Task Force shall be composed of not more than eleven members appointed by the President. The members shall include distinguished individuals with relevant experience or subject-matter expertise in law enforcement, civil rights, and civil liberties.
(b) The President shall designate two members of the Task Force to serve as Co-Chairs.
Sec. 3. Mission.
(a) The Task Force shall, consistent with applicable law, identify best practices and otherwise make recommendations to the President on how policing practices can promote effective crime reduction while building public trust.
(b) The Task Force shall be solely advisory and shall submit a report to the President by March 2, 2015.
Sec. 4. Administration.
(a) The Task Force shall hold public meetings and engage with Federal, State, tribal, and local officials, technical advisors, and nongovernmental organizations, among others, as necessary to carry out its mission.
(b) The Director of the Office of Community Oriented Policing Services shall serve as Executive Director of the Task Force and shall, as directed by the Co-Chairs, convene regular meetings of the Task Force and supervise its work.
(c) In carrying out its mission, the Task Force shall be informed by, and shall strive to avoid duplicating, the efforts of other governmental entities.
(d) The Department of Justice shall provide administrative services, funds, facilities, staff, equipment, and other support services as may be necessary for the Task Force to carry out its mission to the extent permitted by law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
(e) Members of the Task Force shall serve without any additional compensation for their work on the Task Force, but shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem, to the extent permitted by law for persons serving intermittently in the Government service (5 U.S.C. 5701-5707).
Sec. 5. Termination. The Task Force shall terminate 30 days after the President requests a final report from the Task Force.
Sec. 6. General Provisions.
(a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
(i) the authority granted by law to a department, agency, or the head thereof; or
(ii) the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budgetary, administrative, or legislative proposals.
(b) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
(c) Insofar as the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as amended (5 U.S.C. App.) (the "Act") may apply to the Task Force, any functions of the President under the Act, except for those in section 6 of the Act, shall be performed by the Attorney General. ￼￼￼￼￼￼
BARACK OBAMA

                                                                Contact: press@ceq.eop.gov

	As part of an ongoing effort to modernize implementation of the National Environmental Policy Act and promote effective and transparent environmental reviews, the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) today released updated draft guidance for Federal agencies on how to consider greenhouse gas emissions and the impacts of climate change in their NEPA analyses, as well as final guidance on conducting programmatic NEPA reviews. These measures will increase the efficiency of environmental reviews and help agencies make informed decisions that are sound investments of taxpayer dollars and good for American communities.

	Draft Guidance on Consideration of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and the Effects of Climate Change

	NEPA requires Federal agencies to consider and transparently disclose the potential effects of their actions and decisions on the environment.  In many cases, Federal actions have the potential to produce greenhouse gas emissions, and also are at risk of experiencing impacts from a changing climate. The draft guidance, which will be available for 60 days of public comment, outlines how Federal agencies should describe these potential effects when conducting NEPA reviews to allow decision makers and the public to more fully understand the environmental impacts of proposed actions.  In turn, agencies will be better able to compare alternatives, and consider measures to reduce the impacts of climate change on Federal resources and investments.

	NEPA ensures information on the potential environmental impacts of agency decisions and projects is transparently available to the public; however it does not dictate decisions or project choices. Even in cases where NEPA analyses identify that alternative actions would have fewer environmental impacts, NEPA does not dictate that decision makers must select such alternatives.

	The guidance seeks to remove uncertainty and provide agencies with a reasoned approach as to how to describe the effects of greenhouse gas emissions from and the impacts of climate change on their proposed actions. Once finalized, the guidance will provide clarity and consistency among agencies, many of which already evaluate greenhouse gas and climate impacts in their environmental reviews. 

	The guidance:


		Encourages agencies to draw from their experience and expertise to determine the appropriate level (broad, programmatic or project- or site-specific) and type (quantitative or qualitative) of analysis required to comply with NEPA. 

		Focuses analysis on the projects and actions with the greatest impacts by providing a reference point of 25,000 metric tons of CO2-equivalent emissions on an annual basis below which a quantitative analysis of GHG emissions is not recommended unless it is easily accomplished. 

		Counsels agencies to use the information developed during the NEPA review to consider alternatives that are more resilient to the effects of a changing climate; and

		Advises agencies to use existing information and science when assessing proposed actions, and highlights tools and methodologies that are available to them for conducting their analyses.


	This guidance was called for by the governors, mayors and other local leaders on the President’s Task Force on Climate Preparedness and Resilience in their recommendations to the President in November.  The Task Force requested the guidance to ensure that projects and investments are advanced with adequate and coordinated consideration of the project design or alternatives relative to climate impacts and greenhouse gas emissions, to avoid unacceptable public health, safety, and financial risks for communities.

	This draft guidance updates earlier draft guidance on consideration of climate change in NEPA reviews that was released by CEQ in 2010 and sought public input on how to address land and resource management actions during a 90-day public comment period. CEQ received and considered comments representing a broad range of views from the public, corporations, non-profit organizations, trade associations, and Federal and state agencies before proposing this updated NEPA guidance, which addresses land and resource management actions. 

	Guidance on Programmatic NEPA reviews

	The CEQ guidance on programmatic NEPA reviews released today is designed to assist agency decision makers and the public in understanding the environmental impacts from proposed large-scope Federal actions and activities, and to facilitate agency compliance with NEPA by clarifying the different planning scenarios under which an agency may prepare a programmatic, broad-scale review.  This guidance has been requested by Federal agencies as they undertake broad, landscape-scale analyses for proposals that affect the resources they manage.  The guidance, which incorporates input from the public and stakeholders, also addresses how agencies can prepare such reviews to ensure they are timely, informative, and useful for advancing decision-making.  The goal of this guidance is to encourage a more consistent approach to programmatic NEPA reviews so that the analyses and documentation will allow for the efficient completion of any necessary tiered reviews.  It builds on guidance issued in 1981 that explained the use of tiering and its place in the NEPA process.

	Background on NEPA Modernization

	Since 2010, the Administration has undertaken a broad effort to modernize Federal agency implementation of NEPA to improve the transparency, involvement of the public, and efficiency of environmental reviews. Efforts include launching a NEPA pilot program to identify and promote more efficient ways to do effective environmental reviews that can be replicated across the Federal Government, and forming rapid response teams to help expedite the review process for transportation, transmission and renewable energy projects, among other actions.

	###
Today the President will sign an Executive Order to create the Task Force on 21st Century Policing and announce its members. The Task Force is part of the Administration’s efforts to strengthen community policing and strengthen trust among law enforcement officers and the communities they serve. The Task Force will be chaired by Philadelphia Police Commissioner Charles H. Ramsey, who also serves as President of the Major Cities Chiefs Police Association, and Laurie Robinson, professor of Criminology, Law and Society at George Mason University and former Assistant Attorney General for DOJ’s Office of Justice Programs.
The Task Force will include law enforcement representatives, community leaders, academics, and youth leaders. Ron Davis, Director of DOJ’s Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) Office will serve as the Executive Director of the Task Force under the direction of the co-chairs. The Task Force will examine, among other issues, how to strengthen public trust and foster strong relationships between local law enforcement and the communities that they protect, while also promoting effective crime reduction. The Executive Order directs the Task Force to prepare a report and recommendations to be presented to the President. An initial report will be due to the President in March.
The taskforce will engage with Federal, State, tribal, local officials, technical advisors, young leaders, and nongovernmental organizations through meetings and 21st century technology to provide a transparent process to engage with the public. The Task Force will convene listening sessions where they will hear testimony, including proposed recommendations for consideration, from invited witnesses and also receive comments and questions from the public. The first session will be held in Washington D.C. in mid-January. Subsequent listening sessions and additional outreach details, including the online public comment process, is forthcoming.
Recent events in Ferguson, Staten Island, Cleveland, and around the country have highlighted the importance of strong, collaborative relationships between local police and the communities they protect. As the nation has observed, trust between law enforcement agencies and the people they protect and serve is essential to the stability of our communities, the integrity of our criminal justice system, and the safe and effective delivery of policing services. 
Task Force members include:
Charles Ramsey, Appointee for Member and Co-Chair, President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing
	Charles Ramsey is the Commissioner of the Philadelphia Police Department (PPD), a position he has held since 2008.  Since 2010, he has served as President of the Major Cities Chiefs Association and the Police Executive Research Forum.  Commissioner Ramsey began his law enforcement career in 1968 as a cadet with the Chicago Police Department (CPD).  Over the next thirty years, he held various positions with CPD, including Commander of the Narcotics Division, Deputy Chief of the Patrol Division, and Deputy Superintendent, a role he held from 1994 to 1998.  In 1998, he was named Chief of the Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia (MPDC), where he served until early 2007.  In 2007, Commissioner Ramsey served on the Independent Commission on Security Forces of Iraq, leading a review of the Iraqi Police Force.  In addition to his current role at PPD, he also serves as a member of the Homeland Security Advisory Council.  Commissioner Ramsey received a B.S. and M.S. from Lewis University.
Laurie Robinson, Appointee for Member and Co-Chair, President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing
	Laurie Robinson is the Clarence J. Robinson Professor of Criminology, Law and Society at George Mason University, a position she has held since 2012.  She served as Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Justice Programs (OJP) in the U.S. Department of Justice from 2009 to 2012.  Prior to that, Ms. Robinson served as the Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General for OJP and Acting Assistant Attorney General for OJP.  Previously, she was a member of the Obama-Biden Transition Team.  From 2003 to 2009, Ms. Robinson was the Director of the Master of Science Program in Criminology at the University of Pennsylvania.  From 1993 to 2000, she served her first term as the Assistant Attorney General for  OJP.  Before joining DOJ, Ms. Robinson spent over twenty years with the American Bar Association, serving as Assistant Staff Director of the Criminal Justice Section from 1972 to 1979, Director of their Criminal Justice Section from 1979 to 1993, and as Director of the Professional Services Division from 1986 to 1993.  She is a Senior Fellow at the George Mason University Center for Evidence-Based Crime Policy, and serves as co-chair of the Research Advisory Committee for the International Association of Chiefs of Police.  She also serves on the Board of Trustees of the Vera Institute of Justice.  Ms. Robinson received a B.A. from Brown University.
Jose Lopez, Appointee for Member, President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing
	Jose Lopez is currently the Lead Organizer at Make the Road New York (MRNY), a Brooklyn-based non-profit community organization focused on civil rights, education reform, and combating poverty.  He became Lead Organizer of MRNY in 2013.  Mr. Lopez began his career in 2000 as Youth Organizer with Make the Road by Walking, which later merged with the Latin American Integration Center to form MRNY in 2007.  He continued to serve as Youth Organizer with MRNY until 2009, when he became Senior Organizer.  Since 2011, Mr. Lopez has represented MRNY on the steering committee of Communities United for Police Reform, a New York City organization advocating for law enforcement reform.  From 2001 to 2004, he was an active contributor to the Radio Rookies Project, an initiative of New York Public Radio.  He received a B.A. from Hofstra University.
Bryan Stevenson, Appointee for Member, President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing 
	Bryan Stevenson is Founder and Executive Director of the Equal Justice Initiative (EJI), a private, non-profit organization headquartered in Montgomery, Alabama.  In addition to directing the EJI since 1989, he is a Clinical Professor at New York University School of Law.  He previously has served as a visiting professor of law at the University of Michigan School of Law. Mr. Stevenson has received the American Bar Association's Wisdom Award for public service, the ACLU's National Medal of Liberty, and the MacArthur Foundation "Genius" Award Prize. Mr. Stevenson received a B.A. from Eastern College (now Eastern University), a J.D. from Harvard Law School, and an M.P.P. from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University. 
Brittany Packnett, Appointee for Member, President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing
	Brittany Packnett is currently Executive Director of Teach For America in St. Louis, Missouri, a position she has held since 2012.  From 2010 to 2012, she was a director on the Government Affairs Team at Teach for America.  Ms. Packnett was a Legislative Assistant for the United States House of Representatives from 2009 to 2010.  From 2007 to 2009, she was a third grade teacher in Southeast Washington, D.C., as a member of the Teach For America Corps.  Ms. Packnett has volunteered as Executive Director of Dream Girls DMV, a mentoring program for young girls, and was the founding co-chair of The Collective-DC, a regional organization for Teach For America alumni of color.  She currently serves on the boards of New City School, the COCA Associate Board, the Urban League of Metro St. Louis Education Committee, and the John Burroughs School Board Diversity Committee.  Ms. Packnett received a B.A. from Washington University in St. Louis and an M.A. from American University.
Susan Rahr, Appointee for Member, President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing
	Susan Rahr is Executive Director of the Washington State Criminal Justice Training Commission, a position she has held since 2012.  From 2005 to 2012, she served as the first female Sheriff in King County, Washington.  Ms. Rahr spent over thirty years as a law enforcement officer, beginning as a patrol officer and undercover narcotics officer.  While serving with the King County Sheriff’s Office, she held various positions including serving as the commander of the Internal Investigations and Gang Units, commander of the Special Investigations Section, and Police Chief of Shoreline, Washington.  Ms. Rahr received a B.A. from Washington State University.   
Tracey Meares, Appointee for Member, President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing
	Tracey Meares is the Walton Hale Hamilton Professor of Law at Yale Law School, a position she has held since 2007.  From 2009 to 2011, she also served as Deputy Dean of Yale Law School.  Before joining the faculty as Yale, she served as a professor at The University of Chicago Law School from 1995 to 2007.  She has served on the Committee on Law and Justice, a National Research Council Standing Committee of the National Academy of Sciences. She was appointed by Attorney General Holder to serve on the inaugural Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Science Advisory Board.  She also currently serves on the Board of Directors of the Joyce Foundation.  Ms. Meares began her legal career as a law clerk for Judge Harlington Wood, Jr. of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit.  She later served as a trial attorney in the Antitrust Division at the Department of Justice.  Ms. Meares received a B.S. from the University of Illinois and a J.D. from The University of Chicago Law School.
Constance Rice, Appointee for Member, President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing
	Constance Rice is a civil rights attorney and Co-Director of the Advancement Project, an organization she co-founded in 1999.  In 2003, Ms. Rice was selected to lead the Blue Ribbon Rampart Review Panel, which investigated the largest police corruption scandal in Los Angeles Police Department history.  In 1991, Ms. Rice joined the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, and in 1996, she became Co-Director of the Los Angeles office.  She was previously an associate at Morrison & Foerster, and began her legal career as a law clerk to Judge Damon J. Keith of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit.  Ms. Rice received a B.A. from Harvard College and a J.D. from New York University School of Law.
Roberto Villaseñor, Appointee for Member, President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing
	Roberto Villaseñor is Chief of Police for the Tucson Police Department (the TPD), a position he has held since 2009.   He joined the TPD in 1980, and has served as Officer, Sergeant, Lieutenant, Captain, and as Assistant Chief from 2000 to 2009.  Chief Villaseñor was named Officer of the Year for the TPD in 1996, and has been awarded the TPD Medal of Merit three times.  He also received the TPD Medal of Distinguished Service.  Chief Villaseñor is the incoming President of the Arizona Association of Chiefs of Police and a Board Member of the Police Executive Research Forum (PERF).  He received a B.S. from Park University and an M.Ed. from Northern Arizona University.
Sean Smoot, Appointee for Member, President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing
	Sean Smoot is currently Director and Chief Counsel for the Police Benevolent & Protective Association of Illinois (PB&PA) and the Police Benevolent Labor Committee (PBLC), positions he has held since 2000.  He began his career with PB&PA and PBLC as a Staff Attorney in 1995, before becoming Chief Counsel of both organizations in 1997.  Since 2001, Mr. Smoot has served as the Treasurer of the National Association of Police Organizations, and has served on the Advisory Committee for the National Law Enforcement Officers’ Rights Center since 1996.  From 2008 to 2009, he was a policy advisor to the Obama-Biden Transition Project on public safety and state and local police issues, and was a Member of the National Institute of Justice and Harvard Kennedy School of Government Executive Session on Policing and Public Safety from 2008 to 2011.  Mr. Smoot served as Police Commissioner of Leland Grove, Illinois from 1998 to 2008.  He received a B.S from Illinois State University and a J.D. from Southern Illinois University School of Law.
Cedric L. Alexander, Appointee for Member, President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing
	Cedric L. Alexander is the Deputy Chief Operating Officer for Public Safety in DeKalb County, Georgia, a position he has held since late 2013.  Dr. Alexander is also the National President of the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives.  In 2013, he served as Chief of Police for the DeKalb County Police Department.  Prior to this, Dr. Alexander served as Federal Security Director for the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport from 2007 to 2013, and from 2006 to 2007, he was Deputy Commissioner of the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services.  From 2005 to 2006, Dr. Alexander was Chief of the Rochester Police Department (RPD) in Rochester, New York, where he previously served as Deputy Chief of Police from 2002 to 2005.  Before joining RPD, Dr. Alexander was a faculty member in the Department of Psychiatry at the University of Rochester Medical Center from 1998 to 2002.  He began his career as a Deputy Sheriff in Florida from 1977 to 1981, before joining the Miami-Dade Police Department, where he was as an Officer and Detective from 1981 to 1992.  He received a B.A. and M.S. from St. Thomas University in Miami, Florida, and a Psy.D. from Wright State University.
WASHINGTON, DC – President Obama took office in the depths of the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression.  Six years later, thanks to the grit and determination of the American people, and the decisive actions he took early on – to bring the economy back from the brink, to save the auto industry, and to build a new foundation for middle-class growth – we’ve made real progress. 
The economy grew at a combined 4.2% pace in the second and third quarters of this year, the strongest six-month period of growth in more than a decade.  American businesses have added new jobs for 57 consecutive months, the longest streak of private-sector job creation on record, for a total of 10.9 million new jobs. The pickup in the pace of job growth this year has come in industries with higher wages.  And wages across the economy are rising – a very welcome sign for millions of American families.
The U.S. economic recovery took a major step forward in 2014, achieving a number of important milestones:


Jobs: By November, 2014 was already the best year of job growth since 1999.

Manufacturing: The manufacturing sector added 15,000 jobs per month, and the average workweek for those workers is the highest since World War II.

Education: The high school graduation rate is the highest on record, and more Americans are earning post-secondary degrees than ever before – the surest pathway to the middle class.

Energy:  America is now the number one oil and gas producer in the world.  For the first time in nearly two decades, we produce more oil than we buy from abroad.  And we’ve put tens of thousands of Americans to work harnessing energy from the wind and the sun.  Just last month, President Obama and President Xi jointly announced the two countries’ respective post-2020 climate targets in Beijing – a move that will spark investment and innovation in clean energy technology and represent a substantial opportunity for U.S. companies.

Housing: The continued rise in home prices has cut the number of underwater mortgages from a peak of 14 million to less than 4 million, and the share of mortgages in delinquency or foreclosure has been cut in half.

Health Care:  Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, 10 million Americans have gained health insurance in the past year alone. Meanwhile, due in part to reforms in the law, the price of health care has been rising at the slowest rate in nearly 50 years.

The Deficit: Under the President's leadership, the deficit has been cut by nearly two-thirds as a share of the economy – putting America on a more sound financial footing for our kids and grandkids.

The President pledged that 2014 would be a year of action and he has spent the last 12 months working with Congress where he could and taking action on his own where needed to revitalize the economy. He also worked closely with leaders from businesses, nonprofits, education, and communities to expand opportunity for more American families. These efforts have helped contribute to economic progress in a number of ways. Some critical efforts include:
Supporting Job Creation Through Manufacturing and Exports
Manufacturing job growth doubled this year – to about 15,000 jobs per month compared to 7,000 jobs per month last year. In total, since February 2010, the United States has directly added 764,000 manufacturing jobs, with the sector expanding employment at its fastest rate in nearly two decades. And the United States’ renewed competitiveness in manufacturing is bringing production back, with 54 percent of U.S.-based manufacturers surveyed by the Boston Consulting Group actively considering bringing production back from China to the United States, up from 37 percent only 18 months prior. The Administration has helped support these efforts by taking steps including:


Launching New Hubs as Part of a National Network for Manufacturing Innovation: President Obama has taken action to launch four more manufacturing innovation institute competitions this year, fulfilling his State of the Union pledge, for a total of eight institutes – representing more than $1 billion of public-private investment – underway, passing the halfway mark on his initial goal of 15 institutes. Each manufacturing institute serves as a regional hub, bridging the gap between applied research and product development by bringing together companies, universities and community colleges, training institutions, and Federal agencies to co-invest in technology areas that lead to new, advanced manufacturing capabilities—and the high-paying jobs that come with them—in the United States. And just this week, a bipartisan coalition of legislators passed the Revitalize American Manufacturing and Innovation Act of 2013 (RAMI) to formally launch the President’s vision for a national network linking the institutes.

Supporting Efforts to Foster Manufacturing Entrepreneurship and Investment in the United States: The Administration helped convene more than 90 mayors who are offering manufacturing entrepreneurs more opportunities to start and grow their businesses, while it also took steps to assist entrepreneurs with securing access to more than $5 billion dollars-worth of cutting edge equipment from the private sector to help start businesses. In addition, the President hosted the first-ever White House Maker Faire to celebrate home-grown manufacturing entrepreneurship and new tools that lower the cost of prototyping.    

Growing Our Investments in Advanced Manufacturing Research: To keep America’s manufacturers on the cutting edge, the Administration has increased Federal investments in advanced manufacturing research and development to nearly $2 billion, up over 34 percent from $1.4 billion in 2011.              

Another Year of Record-Breaking Exports: U.S. exports of goods and services through the third quarter of 2014 have increased by 3 percent from 2013, putting us on pace for a fifth consecutive year of record exports. Industries driving this growth include automotive vehicles and parts, petroleum products, and consumer goods as well as services exports, such as travel and tourism and financial services. The services export surplus continued to widen in 2014 to more than $176 billion through the first three quarters, up from $168.6 billion through the similar period in 2013.
		

The Made in Rural America Initiative Leads to a Boost in Small Rural Manufacturing Exports and Other Companies: U.S. agricultural exports reached a record $152.5 billion in fiscal year 2014, surpassing last year’s $144 billion. President Obama’s Made in Rural America Initiative, launched in February, convened a summer “Rural Opportunity Investment” conference and hosted six major regional forums and other rural-focused events, providing enhanced export-related assistance and information to more than 1,000 attendees.

Intensifying and Broadening Our Export Promotion: In April, the Administration unveiled plans to open new Foreign Commercial Service offices in Angola, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Tanzania, Tunisia, China, and Burma – expanding the Commerce Department’s presence in 78 countries worldwide. The Commerce Department led and certified about 640 companies on 47 trade missions in 2014, up from 490 companies on 44 missions in 2013.

The Advocacy Center at the Department of Commerce Enjoyed a Record-Breaking Year in Helping U.S. Firms Win Contracts Abroad to Create Jobs at Home: The Advocacy Center coordinates federal government advocacy for U.S. firms vying with foreign companies for government procurements overseas. In fiscal year 2014, Advocacy Center clients signed a record 90 international procurement contracts, a 50 percent increase from fiscal year 2013. Of the $134 billion in Advocacy Center deal wins, $80 billion was U.S. export content, supporting nearly 400,000 American jobs. Nearly 20 percent of the Advocacy Center’s 2014 wins were small and medium-sized U.S. companies.



Taking Action to Raise the Minimum Wage
Following President Obama’s call on Congress to raise the national minimum wage to $10.10, states, cities and counties, and business leaders have taken action on their own to increase wages across the country. And on February 12, President Obama signed Executive Order 13658, requiring that workers on new Federal contracts be paid $10.10 an hour.


14 States Passed Minimum Wage Increases – and 7 Million Workers Are Set to Benefit From Increases Passed Since the President’s Initial Call in 2013: 14 states passed an increase in the minimum wage this year. According to estimates from the Council of Economic Advisers (CEA), about 7 million workers will benefit from increases in the minimum wage that have passed in 17 states and D.C. since the President made his initial call to raise the wage in the 2013 State of the Union.  

Cities and Counties Have Also Taken Steps to Raise Wages: Cities like San Francisco, Chicago and Philadelphia have taken action to raise wages for either all local residents or city contractors.

Businesses – Both Large and Small – Are Taking Action: Since the beginning of the year, large companies like Gap Inc., Disney, and IKEA as well as small businesses across the country have announced increases to their starting wages. For example, Gap Inc.’s increase in its starting wage to $10 an hour by next year will benefit 65,000 workers – and has already helped increase applicants for new positions by 10 percent.

President Obama’s Action will Ensure that All Employees of Federal Contractors are Paid at Least $10.10 an Hour: Under Executive Order 13658, all new Federal contracts signed after January 1, 2015 will include a provision requiring a minimum wage of at least $10.10 an hour, which will eventually increase pay for hundreds of thousands of workers over time.

Supporting Job Skills and Employment Opportunities
Working with Congress, businesses, states and cities and non-profits, the President has taken action to make sure our job-training system is preparing and connecting Americans to the jobs that employers are looking to fill. From an across-the-board review of our job-training system to new grants that support apprenticeships and help connect the long-term unemployed to work, the President and his Administration have used every tool available to train Americans with the skills they need, and connect them with businesses that are looking for skilled workers.


Reforming Our Job-Training System to Make It Demand Driven: Following a Presidential Memorandum signed by the President in January, the Vice President led a review of our job training system designed to make our Federal employment and training programs more focused on preparing workers for jobs in high-demand sectors. Working together, agencies with employment and training programs developed a job-driven training checklist that is designed to ensure that programs fulfill this purpose – and will be applied to grant programs across all agencies. For example, training for vocational rehabilitation counselors now includes training in employer engagement and use of labor market information to identify in-demand fields.

Passage of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act: President Obama signed into law the bipartisan Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, which included reforms that the Vice President’s job-driven review had deemed essential, including measuring employment outcomes across all programs, including new measures that illustrate how effectively the workforce system is serving businesses, and requiring training provider scorecards to make it easier for jobseekers to select training programs based on their past results.

Getting Long-Term Unemployed Americans Back to Work: President Obama issued a three-part call to action – to employers, to communities across the country, and to federal agencies – to help Americans who are out of work, including the long-term unemployed, find jobs or get the skills they need so they can succeed in the labor force. Since that call to action, long-term unemployment has declined by 1.1 million and progress has been made on all three fronts, including:
		

				$170 million in grants awarded in October to programs in 20 states and Puerto Rico to partnerships between non-profits, local government, and employers to train and match long-term unemployed job seekers for in-demand jobs.

				A new set of best practices for hiring and recruiting the long-term unemployed signed by over 200 businesses – including 80 of the nation’s largest companies – to ensure that these candidates receive a fair shot during the hiring process.

				Toolkits created by Deloitte Consulting in partnership with the Rockefeller Foundation and with the input of about 100 White House Best Practice signatories to help more employers implement the best practices.

				Finally, following up on a Presidential Memorandum issued in January, the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) issued guidance to Federal agencies to ensure that individuals who are unemployed or have faced financial difficulties because of circumstances like job loss receive fair treatment and consideration for employment by Federal agencies.



$450 Million in Grants to Nearly 270 Community Colleges Partnering with More than 400 Employers Nationally: In September, the Administration announced the winners of $450 million in job-driven training grants going to nearly 270 community colleges across the country. Administered jointly by the Department of Labor and Department of Education, the grants provide community colleges and other eligible institutions of higher education with funds to partner with employers to expand and improve their ability to deliver education and career training programs that will help job seekers get the skills they need for in-demand jobs in industries like information technology, health care, energy, and advanced manufacturing.

Investing in a Competitive Workforce Through Apprenticeships: The Administration has launched a $100 million American Apprenticeship Grants competition, administered by the Department of Labor, to help more workers and employers access this evidence-based training method, and is working with the private sector and states and cities to expand access to apprenticeships, which provide a pathway to good jobs in high-demand fields. 

Providing High-Quality Education to America’s Students
Ensuring that all Americans are prepared for the jobs of the future and strengthening middle-class security, starts with a strong education system.  The President has taken a number of steps over the past year to expand access to high-quality early childhood education, connect every student to high-speed Internet, and make college more affordable.


Committing to Affordable Higher Education: In August 2013, President Obama committed to making college more affordable for all Americans during a major speech at the State University of New York Buffalo.  He explained that while a great education is more important than ever, too many students are facing the difficult choice between risking the inability to pay off student loans or forgoing college and suffering reduced lifetime earnings.  This year, the President made significant progress in alleviating this burden for millions of families, graduates, and low-income students.
		

Expanding Pay As You Earn (PAYE): This year the President took action to ensure that – building on past progress made under this Administration -- everyone with a direct student loan can cap their loan payments at 10 percent of their income. For students that need to borrow to finance college, PAYE provides an important assurance that student loan debt will remain manageable.  Because the PAYE plan is based in part on a borrower’s income after leaving school, it shares with students the risk of taking on debt to invest in higher education.  Today an additional 5 million federal student loan borrowers have the opportunity to benefit from PAYE.

The President and First Lady’s Call to Action on College Opportunity: The White House hosted a second College Opportunity Summit on December 4, 2014.  This second Summit generated over 600 actions by colleges, universities, and the private sector to improve outcomes for college students, including over 100,000 additional high school graduates prepared for college and hundreds of thousands of additional college graduates.  

Protecting Students from Unaffordable Debts at Career College Programs:  The Administration believes that career colleges play an important role in the higher education system.  But too many hard-working students suffer from poor job opportunities and high levels of debt.  That’s why the Administration finalized critical gainful employment regulations that hold career training programs accountable for putting their students on the path to success.  The new rules will ensure that career colleges do not leave student with loans they cannot afford to repay. Due to these regulations, 1,400 programs serving 840,000 students will improve the outcomes for their students-- or lose access to federal student aid.



Committing to Early Education: Throughout 2013 and 2014, the President challenged states, business leaders, and Congress to help more children gain access to the early education they need to succeed in school and in life.  On December 10, 2014, the President convened philanthropists, educators, community leaders and others to announce a collective investment of over $1 billion for early childhood education.  Federal commitments of $750 million will support early learning for over 63,000 children while corporate and philanthropic leaders’ independent commitments of $330 million will expand the reach and enhance the quality for thousands more.

ConnectED to the Future:  In June 2013, President Obama visited Mooresville, NC to announce the ConnectED Initiative, which aims to ensure 99% of American students will have access to next-generation broadband in the classroom by 2017, and called for private sector leaders and the FCC To help connect our students. Since that time, the FCC has taken steps to modernize the E-rate program to support high-speed connectivity for America’s schools and libraries, providing a $2 billion down payment and passing a proposal that provides recourses needed to meet the President’s ConnectED goals.  Additionally, private-sector companies have committed more than $2 billion in resources to schools to supplement federal actions and help support cutting-edge technologies across a greater number of schools and homes. On November 19, 2014, The President hosted school leaders and educators to push this effort forward and make all schools “Future Ready”.  More than 1,200 superintendents joined the Administrations Future Ready District Pledge to set a vision for digital learning across America.  Combined, this pledge will already reach 10 million students across 16,000 schools.  

