The White House and U.S. Department of Energy Announce Private Sector Commitments to Cut Carbon Pollution and Reduce Our Dependence on Foreign Oil
The Obama Administration is committed to taking responsible steps to combat climate change and reduce our dependence on oil. That is why today, the White House and the Edison Electric Institute, which represents investor-owned electric utilities, are announcing new commitments by more than 120 businesses, non-profits, and schools, including more than 70 Edison Electric Institute utility companies, to purchase electric vehicles and technologies and to install workplace charging stations.
Today’s commitments demonstrate that businesses across the U.S. are investing in the technology that will enhance our energy security by reducing our dependence on oil, promoting measures to cut fuel costs for American families and businesses, and helping the U.S. continue to cut carbon pollution. In fact, electric vehicles can actually get cleaner as they get older, because the grid they are plugged into can be powered by cleaner energy over time. Today’s announcements include:


		Commitments from more than 70 electric utility companies to devote at least 5 percent of their annual fleet acquisition budgets to purchasing plug-in electric vehicles and technologies, totaling investments of approximately $50 million per year.

		61 new businesses, schools, and non-profits committing to install workplace charging stations for their employees.

		A new action by the U.S. Department of Energy to support new, competitively-awarded projects to enable aggregated purchases of EVs and other advanced technology vehicles.

The commitments made today will create new demand, bringing the U.S. one step further to achieving the EV Everywhere Grand Challenge President Obama launched in March 2012. The goal of the challenge is to become the first nation in the world to produce plug-in electric vehicles that are as affordable for the average American family as gasoline-powered vehicles. Since 2009, the cost of battery technology has already come down by more than 60 percent.  As costs have fallen and vehicle choice has grown, plug-in electric vehicle sales continue to grow rapidly.  Sales in the first ten months of 2014 were nearly 25 percent higher than during the same period in 2013. Today, 13 manufacturers offer 19 electric vehicle models, presenting consumers with real choices as they look to adopt new technology, enhancing the competitive position of U.S. industry, and driving job creation through American innovation.
Electric Utilities Leading By Example: More than 70 electric utility companies today announced a commitment to devote at least 5 percent of their annual fleet acquisition budgets to purchasing plug-in electric vehicles and technologies, totaling investments of approximately $50 million per year. The companies will meet the 5 percent commitment by purchasing a variety of technologies, from electric passenger cars to medium- and heavy-duty work trucks with electric Power Take Off (ePTO) systems that power the trucks at worksites without the need to run the engine. Deploying plug-in vehicles in utility fleets carries a powerful message to the community about the capabilities of plug-in technology. By adopting plug-in technologies in their own fleets, utilities will be better equipped to enable their customers – including commercial fleets – to follow suit. This is an unprecedented effort by the electric utility industry to lead by example, and drive the electric vehicle market. Examples of companies making the commitment today include:


		Dayton Power & Light

		Indianapolis Power & Light

		Minnesota Power

		Superior Water, Light and Power Co

		Ameren Illinois

		Ameren Missouri

AEP Ohio

AEP Texas

Appalachian Power

Indiana Michigan Power

Kentucky Power

Public Service Company of Oklahoma

Southwestern Electric Power Company

Avista Utilities

MidAmerican Energy Company

NV Energy

Pacific Power

Rocky Mountain Power

CenterPoint Energy, Inc.

Consumers Energy

Consolidated Edison Co of New York

Pike County Light & Power Company

Rockland Electric Company

DTE Electric

Duke Energy Carolinas

Duke Energy Florida

Duke Energy Indiana

Duke Energy Kentucky

Duke Energy Ohio

Duke Energy Progress

Southern California Edison

Empire District Electric Company

Baltimore Gas and Electric Company

Commonwealth Edison Co.

PECO Energy

Florida Public Utilities

Kansas City Power & Light Company

Green Mountain Power Corporation

Hawaii Electric Light Company, Inc.

Hawaiian Electric Company, Inc.

Maui Electric Company, Ltd.

Central Maine Power

New York State Electric & Gas

Rochester Gas & Electric

Wisconsin Public Service Corporation

National Grid

Florida Power & Light Company

Connecticut Light and Power

NSTAR

Public Service of New Hampshire

Western Massachusetts Electric Co.

Atlantic City Electric

Delmarva Power

Pepco

Pacific Gas & Electric Company

Arizona Public Service Company

Public Service Co. of New Mexico

Texas-New Mexico Power Company

Portland General Electric

Kentucky Utilities

Louisville Gas & Electric

PPL Electric Utilities Corporation

PSEG Long Island

Public Service Electric and Gas Company

Puget Sound Energy

Alabama Power Company

Georgia Power Company

Gulf Power Company

Mississippi Power Company

Tampa Electric Company

Westar Energy

We Energies

Leading U.S. Organizations Stepping Up To The Workplace Charging Challenge: The Energy Department’s Workplace Charging Challenge encourages America’s employers to commit to providing EV charging access for their workforce.  After the home, the workplace is the most likely place a vehicle will spend time parked – a significant opportunity to expand our nation’s charging infrastructure. In fact, the ability to charge at work can potentially double a PEV driver's all-electric daily commuting range. The Workplace Charging Challenge has grown to 150 members since its launch in January 2013 with 13 founding members.  Today, 61 new businesses, non-profits, and universities are joining the challenge:


		Advocate Health Care

		AeroVironment, Inc.

		Arkansas Power Electronics

		Atlanta Regional Commission

		Avista Utilities

		BECO South

		BMW North America

		City of Palm Springs

		College of Lake County

		Conrad N Hilton Foundation

		Consumers Energy

		Duro-Last

		El Camino Real Charter High School

		Electric Power Research Institute(EPRI)

		EMD Serono

		EV Grid

		Evolution Marketing

		Great River Energy (GRE)

		Green Cab VT

		Green Mountain Power

		Green Wheels

		Hannah Solar

		Harvard University

		Heartland Community College

		IDEXX Laboratories, Inc.

		Kaiser Permanente

		Kankakee Community College

		Kaskaskia College

		KEMET

		Kohl's

		Legrand

		Leviton

		Lewis and Clark Community College

		Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (LADWP)

		Melink Corp

		Mitsubishi

		Northern Illinois University

		Pacific Gas & Electric

		Pat's Garage

		Pentair Water Pool and Spa, Inc.

		PJM Interconnection

		Pomona College

		PPL Electric Utilities

		Prairie State College

		Rockwood Lithium

		SAS Institute

		SemaConnect

		State of Illinois

		Telefonix Inc.

		Township High School District 214

		UL LLC

		University of California Los Angeles - Smart Grid Energy Research Center

		University of Louisville

		University of Maine

		University of North Carolina at Pembroke

		University of Vermont

		Vermont Energy Investment Corp

		Volkswagen Group of America

		Westar Energy

		Wisconsin Public Service Corporation

		Zero Motorcycles Inc.

Enhancing Aggregated Purchasing To Simplify EV Adoption: The U.S. Department of Energy is also announcing a Notice of Intent to support new, competitively-awarded projects of up to $2 million, to enable aggregated purchases of EVs and other advanced technology vehicles. Aggregated purchasing maximizes customers’ collective buying power by taking advantage of volume pricing and helps provide manufacturers with an assured sales base. Often when attempting to assemble themselves into groups to aggregate purchasing power, companies run into hurdles that inhibit their ability to coordinate—for example the lack of innovative financing mechanisms that allow a diverse group of companies to participate. This funding would help pay for that coordination function and create additional models of successful aggregate purchases that could be applied by other groups. Aggregated purchasing provides an opportunity for manufacturers and suppliers to lower costs through assured purchases and for fleet operators and other customers to benefit from more favorable pricing. 
Today’s actions build on substantial progress.  Since President Obama took office, the number of Federal fleet EVs in operation has grown significantly from only 57 in FY 2009 to nearly 4,000 in FY 2013, and the number of hybrid electric vehicles in the Federal fleet has grown significantly from fewer than 1,800 in FY 2008 to nearly 16,000 in FY 2013.  Just last week, the Los Angeles Air Force Base became the first Federal facility to replace 100 percent of its general purpose vehicle fleet with plug-in electric vehicles (PEVs). With 42 vehicles and charging stations, LA Air Force Base represents the largest PEV vehicle fleet on a federal facility -- and the largest Vehicle to Grid (V2G) demonstration in the world. Eight states have also committed to putting 3.3 million zero-emission vehicles on the road by 2025, in part by including them in their own public fleets.
Roosevelt Room
11:05 A.M. EST
THE PRESIDENT:  Well, I’ve got my team here to talk about Ebola.  But before I do, I want to just make mention of the horrific attacks that took place in Jerusalem. 
We know that two attackers senselessly and brutally attacked innocent worshippers in a synagogue during their morning prayers. Obviously, we condemn in the strongest terms these attacks.  A number of people were wounded, and four people were killed, including three American citizens.  So this is a tragedy for both nations, Israel as well as the United States.  And our hearts go out to the families who obviously are undergoing enormous grief right now.
Secretary Kerry has spoken to Prime Minister Netanyahu.  President Abbas has strongly condemned the attacks.  Tragically, this is not the first loss of life that we have seen in recent months.  Too many Israelis have died.  Too many Palestinians have died.  And at this difficult time, I think it’s important for both Palestinians and Israelis to try to work together to lower tensions and to reject violence.
The murderers for today’s outrageous acts represent the kind of extremism that threatens to bring all of the Middle East into the kind of spiral from which it’s very difficult to emerge.  And we know how this violence can get worse over time.  But we have to remind ourselves that the majority of Palestinians and Israelis overwhelmingly want peace and to be able to raise their families knowing they’re safe and secure.  The United States wants to work with all parties involved to make that a reality, and to isolate the kind of extremists that are bringing about this terrible carnage.
I now want to turn to the topic of this meeting, the Ebola situation.  Obviously, some of the attention on the crisis has ebbed over the last several weeks, but the challenges remain.  We have seen most recently Dr. Martin Salia, a surgeon who contracted Ebola in Sierra Leone -- he was flown back to the United States, to the Nebraska facility, to try to get treated.  Unfortunately, he was already in critical condition, and, sadly, passed away early Monday morning.  So our thoughts and prayers are with his family.
Beyond this tragedy, though, we’ve established that when Ebola is promptly diagnosed and treated, then we have a great chance of curing it.  Of the eight patients who were treated promptly in the United States, all eight have recovered.  They are Ebola free and they are back with their families.
And after the first incident of Ebola in Dallas, and the unfortunate passing of Mr. Duncan, we promptly acted based on some of the lessons that were learned from Dallas.  We’ve put in place new protocols for protective gear for our health workers.  We ramped up our training and outreach for health workers.  We’ve added screening for travelers to the United States.  We’re funneling all these passengers into five airports.  And we put in place rules for public health workers to monitor travelers for 21 days after they arrive here.
As we saw in New York with Dr. Craig Spencer -- one of the courageous health workers who has voluntarily traveled to the region to try to fight this disease -- our efforts to identify, isolate, and then treat Ebola patients can work.  America has proven that it can handle the isolated cases that may occur here.
But as long as the outbreak continues to rage in the three countries in West Africa -- Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea -- this is still going to be a major -- not just for America, but for the entire world. 
We are nowhere near out of the woods yet in West Africa.  The good news is, in parts of Liberia, our efforts, both civilian and military, are really paying dividends, and we are seeing the curve bending so that we are on track, with diligence, dealing with the hotspots that may still reemerge, to actually get a handle on that disease. 
We’re still seeing an increase of cases in Sierra Leone, although our British counterparts are doing an excellent job working with us and the international community to coordinate the situation there.  In Guinea, the numbers are lower than in Sierra Leone or Liberia, but they’re often in very remote areas that are hard to reach, and some of the international coordination still needs to improve.
The bottom line, though, is that we know how to treat this disease given that it has emerged as such a large, significant outbreak in these areas, and we recently saw some cases in Mali. It underscores how important it is to continue to push forward until we stamp out this disease entirely in that region.  Until we do, there are threats of additional outbreaks.  And given the nature of international travel, it means that everybody has some measure of risk.
Here at home, we’ve made great progress in preparing our health care system to deal with any possible threat.  Our scientists continue to make progress with vaccines and treatments, but we’ve got plenty of work to do.
So all of this means that, although we should feel optimistic about our capacity to solve the Ebola crisis, we cannot be complacent simply because the news attention on it has waned.  We have to stay with it.  And that’s why I’m calling on Congress to make sure that it approves before it leaves the emergency funding request that we put forward to respond to Ebola, both domestically and internationally. 
The funding is going to help us strengthen our domestic health systems so that we can respond to any future cases that may arise in the United States wherever they might happen.  It’s going to devote much-needed resources to sustain our efforts in West Africa.  It will accelerate the testing and approval of Ebola vaccines and treatments.  And it’s going to help vulnerable countries to, in the future, prevent, detect, and respond to outbreaks of various communicable diseases before they become epidemics. 
And that, ultimately, is good for our public health.  The more we can catch these things early where they begin, the less risks we have over the long term.  And as I’ve said before, in some ways, we are lucky Ebola is a very difficult disease to transmit.  If we have a comparably lethal disease that is airborne, we have much bigger problems.  So this gives us an opportunity to start putting in place the kind of public health detection infrastructure around the globe that is necessary should additional pandemics or epidemics or outbreaks arise. 
All this makes it necessary for Congress to act.  This is not a Democratic issue; it is not a Republican issue -- this is a basic issue of the health and safety of the American people.  And so I hope that Congress is on the case on this issue before they leave.
Thank you very much, everybody.
END
	11:13 A.M. EST
