To view the White House report on Increasing College Opportunity for Low-Income Students, click HERE.  To view the list of Commitments to Action on College Opportunity, click HERE.
The President believes he has a job to do, and every day he is fighting to create more opportunities for working and middle class Americans. And while he will continue to work with Democrats and Republicans in Congress to move our country forward, the President is committed to partnering with colleges and universities, business leaders, nonprofits and others to do everything he can to support more college opportunities for students across the country.
Today, in response to the President’s call to action, the President and First Lady are joining with leaders in higher education to announce over 100 new commitments to expand college opportunity. To help more students afford and graduate from college with the skills they need, the Administration has already taken action including doubling Federal investments in Pell Grants and college tax credits and reforming student loans.  Last August, the President laid out an ambitious new agenda aimed at improving college value, removing barriers to innovation and competition, and ensuring that student debt remains affordable. As the Administration continues to push for changes that keep college affordable for all students and families, we can and must do more to get more low-income students prepared for college, enrolled in quality institutions, and graduating if we are to achieve our North Star goal of leading the world in the share of college graduates by 2020. Together, the President, the First Lady and these leaders in higher education are taking another step to help ensure that every child, rich or poor, has the opportunity for a quality college education so they can get ahead. 



Over 100 New Commitments to Expand College Opportunity: The participants in today’s event were asked not simply to attend an event – but to commit to new action in one of the following areas crucial to college opportunity: 





				Connecting more low-income students to the college that is right for them and ensuring more graduate



				Increasing the pool of students preparing for college through early interventions



				Leveling the playing field in college advising and SAT/ACT test preparation



				Strengthening remediation to help academically underprepared students progress through and complete college 


Today, over 100 colleges and universities and 40 organizations are announcing new commitments to action to build on their existing efforts in this area. Together, these actions will serve hundreds of thousands of students across the country.





Improving College Opportunity Is Important to Increasing Economic Mobility and Growing the Economy: Without college, a child born in the bottom quintile has only a 5 percent chance of making it to the top quintile. However, the chance of making it to the top nearly quadruples with a college degree – with a nearly equal chance of making it to the top quintile as staying in the bottom quintile. Yet only 9 percent of those born in the bottom quartile attain a bachelor’s degree by age 25, compared to 54 percent in the top quartile. Improving college success is one of the most powerful tools to increase economic mobility and reduce inequality. 


Taking Further Action to Expand College Opportunity: This event is not the culmination of these efforts, but rather the launch of a mobilization by the White House and the Department of Education, which will help share and develop additional evidence on what works and foster new commitments to action from a broader range of colleges and universities, business, nonprofits and other leaders. In 2014, the White House and the Department of Education will work with outside groups to engage in further gatherings, catalyze new and additional commitments, develop a follow-up report on progress and hold a White House convening over the next year. 


The President and First Lady’s Call to Action on College Opportunity
As part of the President and First Lady’s national call to action on college opportunity, over 100 college presidents and 40 non-profits, foundations and other organizations are announcing new commitments in the following key areas:


Connecting more low-income students to the school that is right for them and ensuring more students graduate.  Many low-income students do not apply to or attend schools where they are most likely to succeed, often because they are not fully aware of their options available to them. Building on models that have had success in better matching low-income students to colleges where their outcomes will be best, participants have committed to doing more to enroll low-income students and ensure they matriculate and graduate. Over 80 colleges and universities and 15 organizations are making commitments in this area, with selected examples including: 


A Doubling of STEM Posse Partner Institutions: The Posse Foundation is announcing a doubling to 10 of its STEM Posse Partner Institutions – serving, over the next five years, 250 additional students from diverse, urban backgrounds who might otherwise be overlooked, providing a total of $35 million in full-tuition, four-year scholarships, and helping students to complete science, technology engineering and mathematics (STEM) degrees at some of the nation’s top colleges and universities. 


College Board Joining With Member Institutions to Offer Four Free Fee Waivers to Eligible Students for College Applications: The College Board is joining with its member institutions to announce that every income-eligible student who takes the SAT will receive four free fee waivers to apply to college for free. 


More than $95 Million in Commitments to Help More Students Complete STEM Degrees: Investments totaling $95 million are being announced today from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute ($65 million over five years) and the Leona M. and Harry B. Helmsley Charitable Trust ($30 million over three years) and to help more students complete STEM degrees.  


Action By More than 80 Colleges and Universities: Over 80 colleges and universities are – in addition to their efforts in other categories – taking actions like engaging in new efforts to recruit students who might not otherwise attend their university, expanding need-based aid for low-income students, setting new goals for increasing the share of low-income students, committing to additional community college transfers and taking new steps to improve outcomes for low-income students once they arrive on campus. 






Increasing the Pool of Students Preparing for College Through Early Interventions:  Low-income students are less likely to prepare to apply for college by taking recommend courses, visiting college campuses, and taking the SAT or ACT.  Building on models that have had success in getting more students to prepare for college through early interventions, participants have committed to working with elementary, middle, and high schools to encourage college-going and assist with preparation. More than 30 colleges and 12 organizations have made commitments in this area, with selected examples including:
		

A New $5 Million Effort to Design Pathways to Success for Careers: Deloitte, Darden, Walmart, AT&T, Mutual of America, and the Samberg Family Foundation are committing $5 million over four years to support College Summit, and in particular a partnership called ScholarJob that will help low-income students across America connect getting an education with getting a great career. This year, with an investment from the Bezos Family Foundation, ScholarJob volunteers will partner with College Summit student Peer Leaders to scale the program, equipping more than 100,000 high school students from low-income communities in 10 cities with cutting-edge technology to help them explore careers, and to attend and complete college. 


$4.5 Million in New Commitments to Redesigned Schools: The Irvine Foundation and Pacific Gas & Electric are making a combined $4.5 million commitment to support the President’s initiative to redesign high schools to include more real-world learning and business partnerships. 


Matching Tens of Thousands of Students With Mentors and Rigorous College-Preparation: iMentor is matching 20,000 new first-generation college students with mentors and Blue Engine is expanding academic preparation in college gateway skills to 10,000 additional students over the next five years 


$12.5 Million in New Funding to Support Excellent STEM Teaching: 100kin10, a network formed in response to the President’s call to action to prepare 100,000 excellent STEM teachers over a decade, is announcing an additional $12.5 million in funding with support from JP Morgan Chase, the Overdeck Family Foundation, the Hewlett Foundation and the New York State Attorney General. 


Efforts by More than 35 Colleges and Universities to Prepare More Students for College: More than 35 colleges and universities are – along with efforts in other categories – taking actions like hosting summer enrichment programs for low-income students; partnering with local high schools to create programs that span high school and link students to college; and encouraging current students or faculty to tutor and interact with low-income high school students 






Leveling the Playing Field in College Advising and Test Preparation. Low-income students are often at a triple disadvantage when it comes to advising and mentorship:  their schools have fewer counselors, they can’t afford extra advising or test prep, and often cannot turn to their parents or peers for college insight. Building on models that have had success in boosting low-income college enrollment, participants have committed to increasing access to mentors and advisors. More than 20 colleges and 16 organizations have made commitments in this area, with selected examples including: 


Serving An Additional 80,000 Students Through the National College Advising Corps: The National College Advising Corps is announcing new commitments from partner universities that will provide more than 80,000 students over three years with college counseling that has shown effectiveness in increasing college enrollment. 


Offering Additional Resources to School Counselors: The National Association for College Admission Counseling will offer free resources and additional training to school counselors to help guide students and their families on the path to college. 


New Effort by Khan Academy to Provide College Advising Support: Khan Academy is developing a new college advising and counseling section, along with new college-prep features that focus students on the specific content they need to be prepared for college math placement tests. 


Providing Thousands of Additional Students With College Prep Support: Organizations including College Possible, College Spring, College Track, OneGoal, Leadership Enterprise for a Diverse America (LEDA) as well as a coalition of groups under the National College Access Network are making commitments to serve thousands of additional students, providing counseling services, high-quality SAT/ACT prep, and other support for students applying to college 


New Commitments by More than 20 Colleges To Offer Advice to Students Navigating College Application: More than 20 colleges and universities are – along with efforts in other categories – taking actions to expand summer college preparation programs for low-income students; creating new relationships with high schools to provide advising about college and financial aid; and expanding opportunities for current college students to work in high schools and middle schools to help advise students on college options 






Seeking Breakthroughs in Remedial Education. While increasing college access is critical, we must ensure that low-income students are successful once they get there. Far too many students enter college underprepared to succeed, and remediation needs at four-year institutions are greatest for low-income students. Only one in four students in remedial classes will eventually earn a degree from a community college. An additional 14 percent will transfer to a four-year college without a certificate or degree. But new models are emerging that have the promise of dramatically improving college outcomes for students in need of remediation.  Participants have committed to significantly improving outcomes for academically underprepared students to ensure they succeed in college by strengthening instruction, using technology, better supporting students in remediation, and reducing the need for remediation. More than 20 colleges and universities, 22 states and the District of Columbia, and 10 organizations have made commitments in this area, including: 


A New Commitment by 22 States and the District of Columbia to a Comprehensive Approach to Address Remediation: 22 states and the District of Columbia supported by Complete College America, have committed to comprehensive approaches to addressing remediation that will help them achieve a significant increase in the number of college students assigned to remediation completing college level math and English their first year, recognizing that most of these students will need additional academic support. Completion of these gateway courses will lead to many more students completing their degrees. 


Providing Colleges With Tools And Resources to Serve Academically Underprepared Students: Key organizations are teaming up to ensure that colleges interested in improving their remediation activities have tools and resources they need to successfully serve students who are academically underprepared.  Achieving the Dream, Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, and Jobs for the Future—experts in institutional change, faculty engagement and curriculum reform, and policy development, respectively, are working to create a "Breakthrough Collaborative." The collaborative will work with willing community colleges, higher education organizations, philanthropy and other stakeholders to help learn together the best ways to implement and improve promising practices that accelerate progression through remediation and gateway courses, especially for those students who are the least college-ready.




In addition to these steps, the Department of Education is taking the following actions to help support low-income students.  This builds on announcements by the Department of Education at the Higher Education “Datapalooza” earlier in the week.


Leveraging Work-Study Jobs to Support Near-Peer Mentoring: To build on promising evidence around the effectiveness of near-peer students as college advisers, the Department of Education will develop and announce in the coming weeks a new effort that would encourage and support institutions to place students into college counseling and mentoring work-study jobs through the Federal Work-Study program. This effort would assist institutions to establish, in partnership with school districts, work-study jobs that will help expand access and strengthen secondary-to-postsecondary transitions by raising awareness about college and financial aid among high school students, as well as provide on-campus work-study mentoring jobs that will help increase postsecondary persistence and completion. 


Building the Evidence Base for Early Intervention through GEAR UP: The Department of Education will partner with the National Council for Community and Education Partnerships (NCCEP) to support NCCEP’s efforts to develop and evaluate best practices from GEAR UP programs related to college fit and college readiness. In addition, the Department will announce that the approximately $62 million GEAR UP grant competition scheduled for next year will focus on building and promoting the use of successful practices aimed at improving college fit, college readiness, and helping ensure students achieve the necessary milestones that provide a pathway to college success.


Testing the Best Approaches to College Advising and Matching Through Upward Bound:  During 2014-15, the Department of Education will commit to developing and testing a new professional development program for Upward Bound staff that includes tools and resources building on lessons and strategies learned in the field to support college matching and in-person college advising. The tool kit and training are being developed in collaboration with the College Board, ACT, and the Council for Opportunity in Education, and will be designed for use with both Upward Bound staff and high school counselors.


Using FAFSA Completion Information to Support College Going: The Department of Education commits to providing a process for sharing data on Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) completion with states, so states and school districts can better identify which students have completed their forms and target efforts to increase completion. This initiative would allow the scaling up of successful initiatives that the Department has launched around FAFSA completion in cities like Chicago, San Antonio and Detroit, which raised FAFSA completion rates by more than 30 percent in some cases. This will be implemented formally through agreements between the Department of Education and state student aid agencies in early 2014, which coincides with the beginning of the FAFSA application cycle for academic year 2014-15.


James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
12:25 P.M. EST
MR. CARNEY:  Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  Thank you for being here.  I hope you all had a chance to either attend or watch the President’s event on college opportunity.  As you know, President Obama has pledged that even as he continues to look for areas of bipartisan cooperation, he will not wait for Congress to act to get things done for the American people.  The President has made clear time and again that in the United States the outcomes of your life should not be determined by the circumstances of your birth.
As we know, there’s no better ladder to economic opportunity than a college degree.  But we also know there is much more we can do to ensure that every child, rich or poor, has access to a quality college education so they can get ahead.  So today, the President and First Lady are bringing together college and university presidents, business and philanthropic leaders, and other stakeholders at the White House to announce as they just did over 100 new meaningful commitments to expand college opportunity.
Today’s commitments are the result of a call to action the administration had issued to participants in advance of the event to help us address the following key areas.  One, connecting more low-income students to the school that is right for them and ensuring more students graduate.  Two, increasing the pool of students preparing for college through early interventions.  Three, leveling the playing field in college advising and test preparation.  And four, seeing breakthroughs in remedial education.
I know that the President, the First Lady, and those involved in organizing this event were extremely gratified by the enthusiastic response to the call to action, the commitments that have been made.  And as a special guest today, I have with me Nancy Zimpher; she is the chancellor of the State University of New York system.  She is a participant in today’s event and I’d like her to speak to you at the top, and then if you have questions for her as somebody who is living and breathing this every day, we’ll do those at the top, and then let her go and I’ll remain for questions on other subjects.
With that, I give you the Chancellor of the State University of New York system.
CHANCELLOR ZIMPHER:  Thank you.  Well, good afternoon, everybody.  I am thrilled to represent the over 80 presidents and chancellors who were in the house to hear the President and the First Lady speak to this ambitious agenda.  What I liked about the crowd is that it was filled with community colleges, elite private institutions, land-grant institutions, comprehensive colleges -- both public and private -- really making a personal and campus commitment to this goal.
What I know is that the President has been on this agenda for quite a while, this really ambitious goal by 2020 that we will be first in the world in terms of college graduates.  Two years ago, he brought a small group of about 12 university presidents and chancellors together to challenge us on these issues and I was part of that.  And happily, this August, the President came to New York -- to Buffalo and to Binghamton -- to announce this agenda of more affordability -- and he has really pounded us on the cost of college; accountability -- that we have outcomes that we can prove we’re making progress and innovations.
So I was told I could say a little bit about SUNY, the State University of New York.  And two days ago, we announced a thing called “Open SUNY” -- we already have 465,000 students whom we serve, but we will grow another 100,000 over the next three years because we want to increase our access for traditional college-age students and, importantly, adults who have no education beyond college who are simply not going to make the grade if they can’t get jobs that require a college degree. 
So let me just say briefly what we’ve been talking about amongst these very enthusiastic presidents and the commitments they’ve made.  We’re talking about access -- fundamentally reaching students where they live in the early grades.  We’ve been talking about early childhood to elementary school to high school, a lot of emphasis on these early college high schools where low-income students from urban and rural areas can get all the tutoring and advising they need, prepare them for the college admissions tests.  So that’s been big in our conversations -- not just the universities, but grassroots organizations that are forming cohorts of students to go to college and support each other.
And then it’s been said over and over again, once you get to college, our responsibility is to get you graduated.  So completion has been a huge issue, and we know that that takes a lot of support for the killer courses that are hard and that maybe students haven’t taken enough math, they’re not ready for English, they’re not ready for the science courses.  So during college, we have to support them.  We do a lot of online tutoring as well and online mentoring to reach our students.
And then one of the things we do at SUNY that we like a lot is talk about success being something after completion, which really means you get a job, and we do that through internships and co-op and that kind of thing.
So let me just close by saying the President said just in this speech this is a “year of action” -- the year of action -- his plan to spend the next three years.  What I think it’s going to take is these thousand points of light, these really thousands of points of light where everybody is doing work in this direction.  But knit it together into a collective set of very data-based, evidenced, collective impact so that we can see these big numbers move through our system and reach our 2020 goal.
So thank you.
MR. CARNEY:  Questions for the Chancellor?  Christi.
Q    Could you talk a little bit about the call to action?  How did the White House reach out to you?  And what are the universities doing that you might not have otherwise been doing here?
CHANCELLOR ZIMPHER:  Well, I think the call to action sort of started quite a while ago when this ambitious 2020 goal emerged.  And as I said, there have been several of these small group conferences -- conversations where we've actually come to the West Wing and met with the President, met with Vice President Biden. 
But this began several months ago with individual phone calls.  I am told that every one of the campus presidents and chancellors here today had at least a half-hour call from Gene Sperling, who does economic development for the White House, asking us to consider coming together and telling us the price of admission was new commitments, adding activities that we hadn't already heretofore engaged in.
So that’s why I mention this massive online program at SUNY.  I have also heard people commit to go into the schools with their students to help students in high school fill out the FAFSA form.  I've heard today about ideas around cohorts, that once you get to, say, a highly selective college you need a cohort of support, a posse of support.  So that’s another idea.  We're trying to bring down remediation by giving students more help as they plan their high school curriculum and take more math courses.  The College Board, ACT, they're represented today, and we've heard that they are partnering with the state of Delaware and with other campuses to actually get students ready for these tests.  We talked the other day at SUNY about a universal PSAT in the 10th grade.  So we have a really good diagnostic early on to make a difference. 
So that and hundreds more of the ideas.  And the President invited -- beyond the people here today and the hundred commitments -- to send more, that there be more action in this regard.
MR. CARNEY:  Major.
Q    What's, in your opinion, the main driver in the last 20 years in college tuition costs?  Anyone who has any experience with that -- and I do -- sees sticker shock with this.  (Laughter.)  What's been driving it, and what are the most innovative ideas you have seen to drive down those costs?  And how much is online education teaching kids online at home as opposed to a structured college campus going to play in that in the future?
CHANCELLOR ZIMPHER:  Well, I think, since so much of our work -- 85 to 90 percent of a university is the people who serve it.  So the costs of employing and managing this massive personnel structure has driven costs in many respects.
I think -- what I've heard today, what I heard last night when the presidents were together is that universities are embracing a smarter business model, if you will; shared services; the kind of procurement.  And the thing I liked about it the best -- and this is true at SUNY, as well -- every dollar we save on smart-sourcing or group procurement or sharing positions, bringing down the administrative overhead, is being cranked into student services.  So our goal at SUNY is $100 million a year in tightening our belt and put that $100 million to student services and more faculty supports. 
So I think that’s going to make a big difference in New York.  We also have a five-year tuition plan that’s affordable and predictable, and we are a very low-tuition state, so we’re trying to control tuition that way.
MR. CARNEY:  Jon-Christopher.
Q    As a product of the City University of New York, and as an adjunct at Georgetown, what I think you’re doing is extremely terrific.  However, problem -- I’m asking you, Chancellor -- you are doing so much remedial work within the system.  Where are the high schools and where is K-12 failing so these students don’t come to you, and you have to basically start -- in many cases, start a few years back?
MS. ZIMPHER:  Well, I am glad you mentioned.  We’ve made a really frontal attack on remediation.  It’s paying twice.  It’s unnecessary.  You take more remedial courses; the more you take, the less you chance you will complete.  So it’s just a rabbit run in the wrong direction.  But we’ve tried really hard not to just point the finger at high schools.  I say so often, we prepare the teachers who teach the kids who come to college, ready or not.  We own this challenge as universities, because we prepare 5,000 teachers a year at SUNY. 
So I think what we need, first of all, is a better understanding of what it takes to do good college work.  I think the Common Core will get us there.  We are in conversation with our K-12 colleagues to get that done.
Secondly, we are adopting, if you will, high schools called early-college high schools -- some are called new-tech high schools, some are called P-TECH high schools -- where we’re actually teaching in those high schools with the idea that students graduate high school with college credit.  And we’re finding, especially in low-income high schools, that if we are with them, if we are systematically partnering with these high school faculty, that we can get a student to college ready to take the college-level courses.  I have heard over and over again, last night and today, university commitments to better partnership with our K-12 colleagues, and I think that’s going to be responded to in the President’s agenda.  I’ve already heard Secretary Duncan tell us how we can do that better and have more impact.
So I’m very optimistic.
MR. CARNEY:  Bill.
Q    Chancellor, what about the connection between, as our economy changes, the demands for the information technology?  And are kids graduating from college today with the skills that companies need and are looking for today?
CHANCELLOR ZIMPHER:  Well, my favorite answer -- and I’ve had a lot of practice at this because I love cooperative education and internships that are supervised, paid for, and lead to a successful job placement.  So one of the things we’re trying to do at SUNY is take co-op to scale, make it accessible to every student.  And what I mean by that is during the course of your college curriculum, you have a bona fide work-based, applied-learning opportunity, hopefully a paid opportunity. 
And what we know from co-op over the years:  If you have that experience, it’s supervised, it’s high-quality work, not just going to get the coffee, and you are an important asset of that company, in all likelihood -- in fact, the figure is 90 percent opportunity -- you will get offered a job in one of those places where you co-op’ed.  That’s kind of supply and demand in higher education that we can make work with our business partners. 
And I think it’s a solution.  Like everything else you’re going to hear about, we can’t just be a thousand points of light.  We have to get to scale.  There are so many good things happening, but it’s 5,000 here, or a campus there.  And I think the greatest challenge of this campaign and this mobilization is how we can collectively focus on a few interventions, that we have the evidence and the data that we know work, and take it to scale.  I hope that’s a recipe for success in this campaign.
MR. CARNEY:  Jon.
Q    Thank you, Jay.  Madam Chancellor, some years back, several United States senators, including Senator Alexander of Tennessee, himself a former Secretary of Education, spoke of the need for trade schools and that there should be some emphasis on it.  Was there discussion or even participation of trade schools at today’s conference?  And what do you agree -- what do you think of that opinion?
CHANCELLOR ZIMPHER:  Well, it takes a village, so I know this is repetitive over time, but I think we feel we have to be open to all pathways.  So if, when we transitioned vocational and technical education we threw the baby out with the bath, we need to reexamine what our technical and vocational schools are doing.  There are some technical universities -- colleges, post-secondary colleges in the house today, but not the high school vo-tech.  In New York, we have an interesting structure where these intermediary vo-tech services help bridge the gap.
So I wouldn’t rule anything out, and if what we need to do is go back and reexamine what some of our vocational-technical programs did years ago -- school to work, you remember all this -- maybe some of that needs to come back into our equation.
MR. CARNEY:  Chancellor, thank you very much.
CHANCELLOR ZIMPHER:  Thank you.  (Laughter.)  I’m glad to move on.  Thank you.
MR. CARNEY:  I think you’d make a great White House Press Secretary.  (Laughter.) 
Well, thank you all very much, and again, thank Dr. Zimpher for participating today both in the event with other college presidents and chancellors and philanthropies and businesses, with the President and First Lady, and here today in the briefing.  I don’t have any other announcements to make so I’ll go to your questions.
Q    Thanks, Jay.  On tomorrow’s speech, assuming that you’re not going to disclose any more details about what the President might say, can you just talk more broadly about what this speech means to him, how important it is, and if he sees this as a defining moment of his presidency and his legacy?
MR. CARNEY:  There’s no question that this is an issue that the President takes very seriously.  And you have heard him speak about it quite a bit over the past year, including in a major speech prior to the beginning of the disclosures that led to so much focus on these issues.
And I think it’s important to note that, as regards the disclosures -- and there’s no question that, as other assessments have demonstrated, they’re very damaging to our national security -- the President has nevertheless acknowledged all along that the debates that those disclosures sparked were legitimate, that the questions that have been asked and the ideas that have been put forward about ways we may need to examine and perhaps reform our signals intelligence collection have all been worthwhile and legitimate.
So tomorrow, the President will give remarks at the Department of Justice discussing the conclusions of the work that he and his team have done in reviewing our signals intelligence collection program.  He starts from the absolute commitment to maintaining the security of the American people, the security of our nation, of our men and women in uniform overseas and our civilians serving overseas, as well as the commitments we have to our allies. 
He has also said that we can and should take steps to make the activities we engage in, in order to help keep America safe and Americans safe, more transparent in order to give the public more confidence about the programs and the oversight of the programs.  So that's the context in which he has deliberated over these issues, in which he has tasked others to dive deep in examining the programs and in suggesting reforms and changes.  And he appreciates all of the ideas he has received and the good work that has been done by the review group and by the PCLOB and others. 
So tomorrow, I think you'll see the product of that effort, and you'll see for yourself and hear for yourself how the President views these issues going forward. 
Q    I want to ask you about one thing on the Hill.  Senator Hatch was saying this morning that Trade Promotion Authority is looking like it's going to fail unless this administration steps up and does more to promote it.  There’s obviously a lot of things that the President would like Congress to pass these days that they've been reluctant to pass.  Where does this rank on those?  Does he have any plans to become more active on this?  And can you talk about why Ambassador Froman didn't attend the hearing today?
MR. CARNEY:  I'll have to refer you to USTR on Ambassador Froman.  I can tell you that Trade Promotion Authority, TPA, is a key part of a comprehensive strategy of the President's to increase exports and support more American jobs at higher wages, including in a stronger manufacturing sector.  We have welcomed the introduction of the bipartisan Congressional Trade Priorities Act of 2014 as an important step towards Congress updating its important role in trade negotiations.  And we are actively working with Democrats and Republicans in Congress throughout the legislative process to pass TPA legislation with as broad bipartisan support as possible.
Now, the United States has the most open markets in the world, but our products and services still face barriers abroad.  That's why we need to use every tool we have to knock down trade barriers that prevent American goods and services from being exported.  If we don't seize these opportunities, our competitors most definitely will.  And if we don't take the leadership to set high standards around the world, we will face a race to the bottom, which is not in the interest of our workers and our firms. 
So this is a priority of the President's.  It's part of a broad approach to expanding exports and creating more opportunities for our businesses to grow.  And we're going to continue to push for it.  I don't have a schedule of his engagement in it.  He is engaged in it.  He speaks with members about it.  He has a team that is engaged in this effort.  And we're going to continue to push for as broad a bipartisan support as we can get.
Roberta.
Q    Canada’s Foreign Minister, John Baird, appeared today in Washington and he said that Canada can’t continue in what he called ”this state of limbo” over Keystone.  And he said that the country needs a decision now, even if ultimately it’s not the decision that Canada wants on the pipeline.  So I’m wondering if you can tell us how much longer Canada has to wait for a decision, one way or the other.
MR. CARNEY:  Roberta, I’d refer you to the State Department, where that process of review is underway, as has been the case on pipelines of this nature, international pipelines, through previous administrations.
Q    So once the State Department finishes its review, which is something that could happen in coming weeks, can you explain to us what process the White House is going to use to make its determination, final determination?
MR. CARNEY:  I don’t want to get ahead of that.  I think that once the process is moving forward, we’ll apprise you of that, and when a decision is made, we’ll announce it.
Q    And lastly, on North Korea, it said that -- North Korea said yesterday or early today that it wants South Korea and the United States to stop the annual military drills in February, March.  But it also offered a truce in hostilities.  And I guess I’m just wondering how the White House interprets that kind of offer.
MR. CARNEY:  I haven’t seen the specific report that you’re referring to.  I can tell you that our commitment to and relationship with South Korea is extremely strong, and I have no changes to announce in how we engage militarily with South Korea in a partnership or in any of the exercises that we engage in.
Brianna.
Q    Thanks, Jay.  A senator who attended the meeting last night with President Obama and Democratic senators said that the President gave an impassioned plea for Congress not to take up new sanctions on Iran.  Can you tell us a little bit about that, and also if the President thinks he won over any Senate Democrats?
MR. CARNEY:  I can tell you that the President, with the senators who were here, discussed many topics and the President raised many topics.  We put out a readout last night about that.
The issue of Iran and potential action on sanctions by Congress did come up and was addressed.  What the President said, as I think a story reflected today, is exactly what we’ve been saying publicly, which is that we appreciate the enormously beneficial partnership we’ve had with Congress in building the most effective sanctions regime in history, but that now is not the time to pass a new sanctions measure because it might have the inadvertent consequence of weakening the sanctions regime and reducing the President’s flexibility when it comes to pursuing a potential peaceful resolution to the Iranian nuclear program and the challenge that presents to the United States and our allies and our partners, and obviously to the P5-plus-1.
So that’s the argument that he is making and that we are making regularly on this issue.  We absolutely agree about the general efficacy of sanctions.  That’s why the President pursued the strategy he pursued.  The purpose of the sanctions was to try to compel a change in Iranian behavior, and we have some evidence that the sanctions regime has had that effect to the point where we have a Joint Plan of Action with Iran -- the P5-plus-1 does -- and we have a technical agreement for the implementation of that Joint Plan of Action, allowing a six-month period now for testing the even harder work of seeing whether we can get a peaceful diplomatic resolution to this challenge in a way that is verifiable and transparent for the United States and our partners.
Q    Is he hopeful he made headway, though?  Did he get any feedback?
MR. CARNEY:  Look, I think the President felt the meeting in general was excellent and he appreciated all the discussions he had and all the input he received.  And on this topic, in terms of the views of senators in the room, I think you’d have to check in with them. 
We obviously feel very strongly about this.  We feel very strongly that, should it be necessary because of a failure by Iran to comply with its obligations in the Joint Plan of Action or a failure by Iran to reach a comprehensive resolution, the President will be very eager to work with Congress to see Congress take action in response to that, if it were to come to pass.  But now we need to allow for the current negotiations to get underway, and then to see whether they can make progress. 
Q    Can you talk about these allegations that we're hearing coming from the Air Force?  The Air Force says it found dozens of officers cheated on nuclear proficiency exams.  They're now investigating.  What does the President think about these allegations that the very people who would be responsible for launching nuclear weapons may have cheated?
MR. CARNEY:  I haven't discussed that with the President.  It hasn't come up in a conversation that I've been part of, so I'll have to direct you to the Department of Defense.  And you can come back to us, and if we have anything on it we'll provide it. 
Jon.
Q    Just a quick follow-up, first on Trade Promotion Authority.  You had all the Democratic senators here last night.  Did the issue come up?  Did the President make the case for Trade Promotion Authority?
MR. CARNEY:  All right, I have a confession to make from the podium, which is that I skipped the meeting to go to the Wizards-Heat game.  (Laughter.)  And that was a heck of a game. 
Q    Pretty good excuse.
MR. CARNEY:  Wow -- the Wizards.  That was astounding and exciting.  So the readout I have of that meeting is secondhand -- very quality secondhand.  But I don’t have every topic discussed.  It was wide-ranging, and I'm sure you can find out from members and we can help you on it.  But beyond what we put out last night and what we just talked about, I don’t have any more details. 
Q    Speaking of basketball, Magic Johnson, Alonzo Mourning have both been tapped for these ads encouraging young people to sign up for Obamacare.  What's the idea behind these ads?
MR. CARNEY:  To reach young people; to convey the message about the value of getting insured, getting covered, the wisdom behind it.  And having sports icons participate in this effort is, in our view, enormously helpful.  We're trying to get the attention of people across the country.  And in every effort like this, you try to get folks where they live, where they will hear and receive the message -- which is a very straightforward one, as I think Magic Johnson has said -- that when you're young and you're a star athlete, you think you're invincible.  And when you're young and you're not even a star athlete, you often think you're invincible.  You're healthy, you're probably not going to get sick; if you do, it will be much later.
But things happen, and that’s what insurance is for.  And you can get injured as a player, you can get injured as a recreational athlete, or you can get sick.  And it's vital to have health insurance. 
So this is part of a broad effort to make sure that young Americans around the country are aware of the options available to them, and are hearing about the wisdom behind getting covered -- because it's so important for their health, for the general health of the nation.
Q    So far, only 24 percent of people who have enrolled are 18 to 34.  How concerned is the White House that you're so short of the goal that most of the outside analysts have set to keeping health premiums low?  This is far short of the 39 percent that we’ve heard is a goal.
MR. CARNEY:  Well, that’s an excellent -- Jon, thank you.  I appreciate the question.  And I think as some folks covering this issue reported, this is actually very solid news, and tracks very closely with what you saw happen in Massachusetts.
And it is a simple, I think, statement of observed fact and experienced fact for everyone in this room who was ever young -- which I think is everyone, and is still current for some of you -- that young people are last to the party when it comes to --
Q    Young people are last to the party?
MR. CARNEY:  -- motivated by deadlines.  They're motivated by deadlines.  When you have -- if you have an uninsured young adult -- it depends on the party you're talking about.  (Laughter.)  But if you have an uninsured young adult who didn’t have insurance, didn’t think he or she needed it, they weren’t necessarily compelled to act by the end of the year deadline, but they will be by the March 31st deadline.  And I think if you look at the Massachusetts experience, where in the first three months of enrollment there young adults made up 15, 23 and 23 percent, we are very much in that bandwidth.
And I think you've seen a lot of quality reporting about why the surge in enrollments that we saw generally, and the even greater surge in youth enrollment that we saw in December, are important trends that we hope and expect to continue.
Q    There's one more question on this.  There are some -- as you know, there are some anti-Obamacare groups that are running marketing efforts to encourage young people not to enroll in health insurance.  What do you make of that effort?
MR. CARNEY:  Well, I hope they're offering to cover the hospital bills and the doctors’ bills that some of these young people will incur without insurance, because that's -- I mean, that's not very helpful advice, is it?  This is a benefit that's out there for everyone who is uninsured to take advantage of.  And it doesn't seem like a very nice thing to do, to urge people not to get health insurance when I think anybody who spends more than five minutes contemplating this choice understands the wisdom of being insured, because no one can predict when they might fall ill and might very much need health insurance.
So I'm not aware of any specific advertising campaign along those lines, but if they exist, it seems a little shortsighted when it comes to the individuals themselves and the nation's health.
Chris.
Q    Thanks, Jay.  Does the President's threat to use his pen to take action if Congress fails to act extend to issue an executive order to protect LGBT workers against discrimination?
MR. CARNEY:  Chris, I don't have any update on our views on that matter.  As you know, the Senate in a bipartisan way passed the Employment Non-Discrimination Act and we welcomed that.  And that represented significant progress, progress that a lot of folks did not predict would happen.  So our view has always been that the best way to address this important matter is through broad, comprehensive employment non-discrimination legislation.  And we support action on that legislation in the House so that the President can sign it.
So this is one of those issues where anybody with a little sense of history -- and its movement and its momentum -- understands that being against equal rights in this matter, being against measures that would ensure non-discrimination places you on the wrong side of history.  This train is moving and it's time for Congress to get on -- get on board the train.  Because we are seeing great advances when it comes to basic equal rights for LGBT Americans and we ought to keep making progress.  And Congress ought to be part of that.
Q    But the President is going to use his pen to protect the livelihood of Americans.  Why would he exclude LGBT Americans from that vision?
MR. CARNEY:  Again, the President believes that, as he did with the repeal of "don't ask, don't tell," that the way to do this is through broad, bipartisan legislation that has passed the Senate.  And that legislation would be much more broad and sweeping than the kind of action you talk about.  But I just don't have -- in terms of our disposition on this matter, I don't have any change or update to give to you. 
But it's certainly I think preferable, and it's going to happen.  It's just a matter of when.  And it's just a matter of when members in the House and leaders in the House decide they want to be on the right side of history. 
Major.
Q    Jay, you never shied away from describing certain questions raised about Benghazi as being partisan in their motivation.  I'd like to get your broad evaluation of the bipartisan Senate Intelligence Committee report on the attack, and specifically two conclusions -- one, that the attack was preventable; and number two, that it was not coordinated but it was opportunistic in its execution.
MR. CARNEY:  First of all, as I said yesterday in the gaggle on Air Force One, the report largely reaffirms the findings reached by the independent Benghazi Accountability Review Board.  And a number of the recommendations in the report are consistent with the work that the State Department has done to improve diplomatic security, including upgrading security cameras, improving fire-protective equipment and increasing Marine security guard presence.
Now, on the issue of could it have been prevented, I think there's no question that there was not adequate security.  There's no other conclusion you can reach when you have four Americans killed, as they were in Benghazi.  And we've been quite clear about that.  The Accountability Review Board's assessment was quite clear on that.  And we have no disagreement with that conclusion. 
And that when it comes to the analysis of the genesis of the attack -- there's been a lot of reporting on that -- I certainly would point you to the IC, the intelligence community, and what they've said about it.  But I don't see anything in this that significantly changes the view that I've seen out there for some time.  There has been obviously a very politicized effort on this that has seen a lot of conspiracy theories floated, reported on as fact, and then debunked.
Our interest is in getting those who are responsible, bringing them to justice, and taking the steps necessary to ensure that this kind of thing can't happen again or is far less likely to happen again.  There's no question that our civilians serving overseas are often serving, or in some cases are serving in dangerous circumstances.  But we need to take all the steps we can to protect them.  And there’s no question that there was inadequate security here, because four individuals lost their lives, including our ambassador.
Q    And the report raises questions about decisions both made and not made by Ambassador Stevens.  Do you agree with the conclusions or the questions raised about his decisions as far as requests for security and, in some cases, turning down offers of security for the mission or the compound?
MR. CARNEY:  I don’t have a view on that aspect of it.  I think the State Department might be the best place to go for that.  I think --
Q    And it’s your -- there’s a Republican annex that blames the Secretary of State.  You might want to work on --
MR. CARNEY:  Shocking.  What I think all of these serious investigations have demonstrated is that it was a very chaotic situation, and it was -- a lot of things happened that led to a tragic outcome.  And decisions were made that led to the events that occurred that night and that included obviously the decision to be in Benghazi.  But I would point to the report itself.  I would point to the Accountability Review Board.  I don’t have an opinion on that beyond our deep condolences to the members of the families of all those four who were lost.
Q    I had a chance to talk to some of the senators as they were leaving last night, and a couple who are certainly on the side of seeking deeper reforms to the NSA surveillance matrix have the feeling that what they’re going to hear tomorrow from the President is a defense of the status quo, some small changes at the margins meant largely to increase public confidence but not fundamentally change the existing methods of surveillance, storage of that data, and the continued collection of metadata in pursuit of counterterrorism investigations.  Are they wrong?
MR. CARNEY:  I think the best thing to do for us and for lawmakers is to wait and see what the President says -- what he has to say tomorrow about the reviews that have been conducted and about the recommendations he has analyzed, and the changes and reforms he wants to --
Q    Are you suggesting they’re unduly pessimistic?  That they might be surprised?
MR. CARNEY:  I think we wouldn’t want to hint one way or the other or any way about the news that’s the President’s to make tomorrow.  And I know there’s a lot of speculation about what decisions he has made, and in some cases there’s been assertions of fact about decisions he has made that I know for a fact he had not yet made when those assertions of fact were made in the press.  So we’ll see tomorrow.
Ed.
Q    Jay, on health care, were you recruiting LeBron for any ads last night?  (Laughter.)
MR. CARNEY:  Well, I’m a Wizards fan so -- I have to say we were greatly appreciative of the time that LeBron James and others took the other day at the White House. 
That was a heck of a game.  But let’s just face facts:  The Wizards are still below 500 and the Miami Heat won two consecutive championships.
Q    A couple of topics.  On health care, there’s a moderate House Democrat named Kurt Schrader of Oregon who told Buzzfeed that he was in a meeting with the White House Chief of Staff Denis McDonough this week and pressed the Chief of Staff on the idea that health insurance premiums are going up.  He claims that Denis McDonough cut him off, and this congressman’s reaction was, ”I’m sure he knows best.  I’m just a little country veterinarian from a small town in the great state of Oregon.  What do I know?  I’m from a marginal district that they need to have, that talks to people on a regular basis.   Whatever.”  I wonder since the President held up that phone this week and said he can reach out to Congress, is this really how fellow Democrats are being treated on the Hill?
MR. CARNEY:  Well, first of all, I think Denis has had a series of excellent meetings with members on these matters, and we are extremely solicitous of the views of members when it comes to what they’re hearing and seeing in their districts, or of senators in their states, on implementation of the Affordable Care Act and other matters.
So I think that, as you saw last night in the meeting that the President headlined, and as I think you’ve seen by and large in the reports about our engagement with Congress at every level, that we are having very fruitful and positive meetings on this subject and many others.
Q    Two other quick ones.  On Iran, congressional sources are telling us that the administration has now delivered the text of the interim nuclear agreement to Capitol Hill.  It’s unclassified, but it has certain restrictions on it so that it can’t be distributed around, it’s in a secure room, people can look at it. 
My question would be -- that’s obviously an attempt to keep down leaks, et cetera, but why not be transparent with not just the Congress, but the American people, so we can actually see the report?
MR. CARNEY:  It’s correct that today we provided Congress with the document containing the technical understandings related to the implementation of the Joint Plan of Action.  That’s the agreement that was just reached, the technical understandings that are essentially instructions to the IAEA for how they carry out the Joint Plan of Action.
Now, these types of documents are not always made public.  In this instance, it is the preference of the IAEA that certain technical aspects of the technical understandings remain confidential.  However, in fulfillment of our commitment to release as much of the information in the text as possible to the public -- so in addition to providing the full text to the Congress, we will release a detailed summary of the text publicly today.
Q    Thank you.  Last one.  On Benghazi, when you were talking to Major about that, you kind of dismissed the idea that Republicans had blamed Secretary of State Clinton.  You said, shockingly that she was blamed.  My question on that would be:  When you have a bipartisan report -- putting aside the Republican assertions -- but a bipartisan report chaired by a Democrat, Dianne Feinstein, suggesting that the State Department could have prevented these attacks, why shouldn’t the head of that State Department be held accountable?  Not attack her, but why shouldn’t she be held accountable?
MR. CARNEY:  I think Secretary of State Clinton -- former Secretary of State Clinton addressed these issues very forthrightly when she was in office and after she left as Secretary of State.  I think that the Accountability Review Board, which was unsparing in its assessments about shortcomings when it came to security, was adopted in full by Secretary Clinton.  And I think that demonstrates a great deal of accountability.
My point, and I’m not the only one making it, is that there’s a certain amount of politics involved in trying to make her the story here.  I think there’s no question, as the ARB demonstrated, as this report demonstrated, as other fair-minded investigations have demonstrated, that there were shortcomings when it came to security, that four Americans lost their lives, and that we needed to take action and changes to ensure that this kind of thing couldn’t happen again.  And I forget the number now of recommendations that the ARB report contained, but Secretary Clinton and the State Department adopted them all and acted on them all.
Q    Beyond those recommendations, Senator Graham, a Republican obviously, was on the floor today, and he compared the Benghazi situation to Chris Christie’s situation, and said, look, he owned up to it, he fired people.  And he specifically said, why hasn’t one person at the White House, the State Department been fired over that?  How do you answer that?
MR. CARNEY:  Well, all I can tell you is, again, this has been exhaustively investigated by both Congress and the ARB and others.  Very sort of stark assessments have been made.  Recommendations have been put forward, including on personnel, and the State Department adopted those.  It strikes me as a little bizarre to try to compare what’s happening in New Jersey to that.  But in terms of the State Department’s actions, the intelligence community’s actions, the administration’s actions in response to recommendations about what needed to be done in the aftermath and in response to the events in Benghazi, I think that there’s a long record of accepting responsibility and acting on those recommendations.
Yes, Kristen.
Q    Jay, thanks.  The President yesterday again called on Congress to pass an extension of unemployment insurance benefits.  It seems like the talks are stalled at this point.  Is that your assessment?  And what is the President going to do to revive the efforts to get this legislation passed?
MR. CARNEY:  We are going to continue to work with members of Congress, with leaders of Congress to urge them to act, because the now more than 1.3 million Americans and their families have been cut off from emergency unemployment assistance -- the kind of assistance they received -- these Americans who are looking for work, that they received in the past during times of heightened unemployment, and including five times in the previous administration when the unemployment rate was lower than it is today.
So there’s no question, as I said yesterday and maybe the day before, that we are disappointed by the refusal at this point of Republicans to take action on this, but we’re not at all giving up.  We’re going to keep working and we’re going to keep pressing, and I know that Senator Reid is doing the same.
Q    The House goes on recess next week, so I guess the question is, how long are people going to have to wait for this to happen?
MR. CARNEY:  It’s an excellent question.  And one wonders -- when members of Congress go back to their districts and states and are asked by a constituent who was cut off, who’s trying to find work -- why Congress didn’t take action as it has in a bipartisan way so many times in the past, what the answer is going to be if that member is somebody who’s been actively working against passage of extension as opposed to for it.
Q    Jay, how much responsibility, though, does the President bear?  I mean, he referenced it yesterday in his speech, but I’ve seen him in past fights over payroll tax cuts, for example, hold regular events when he wants to see something get accomplished.
MR. CARNEY:  Kristen, I don’t think there’s one -- there’s a single subject on which the President has spoken more, cajoled more, acted more in the past eight weeks, or two months -- from November through now -- than this issue.  So we’re definitely disappointed and frustrated, and we want action. 
Q    When was the last time he spoke with Speaker Boehner about this?
MR. CARNEY:  I don’t have any updates on those conversations, but I don’t think Speaker Boehner requires a phone call from the President to know that it’s the right thing to do or to -- he’s been asked about why he won’t act on it, and I think he should continue to be asked why he won’t act on it.  In the Senate, there’s been an effort to accommodate, by Senator Reid, Republican concerns when it came to pay-fors for the long-term extension or allowing amendments, and those overtures have been rebuffed.
Again, what’s lost in this is that there are more than a million Americans and their families who are left hanging and twisting in the wind while these debates continue.  It would just be far more appropriate for Congress to come together, pass this extension in the manner that it has in the past.
Q    And so just to be clear, does he think lawmakers should cancel their recess next week?
MR. CARNEY:  Lawmakers should pass it as soon as they can.
Q    All right.  And just quickly on Afghanistan, where do the talks stand over getting Karzai to sign BSA?  Has he shown any more willingness in recent days to sign it?
MR. CARNEY:  Our position continues to be that if we cannot conclude a Bilateral Security Agreement promptly with the Afghan government, then we will initiate planning for a post-2014 future in which there would be no U.S. and no NATO troop presence in Afghanistan.  That’s not the future we’re seeking, and we do not believe that it is in Afghanistan’s interests to pursue that future either. 
So we are, through our representation in Kabul and our engagement with the Afghan government, making our views clear on this matter.  But it remains true that the delay in signing negatively affects confidence in the region as well as our and our allies’ ability to plan a potential follow-on mission.  And with the drawdown already ongoing, decisions have to be made soon about issues such as base closures and force levels.  So without a BSA, near-term decisions about those issues would have to be made accordingly.  And as you know, we’ve said that absent a BSA we can’t maintain any kind of troop presence in Afghanistan beyond 2014.
Q    And you used the term “soon.”  Would the White House be willing to wait beyond the end of January to have Karzai sign the BSA or does he have to make a decision before the end of the month?
MR. CARNEY:  We have said that we don’t have any deadlines to announce, but this has to be a matter of weeks and not months.  And it’s a simple equation when you’re talking about the kind of planning that has to go into structuring a troop presence and a mission for post-2014 in Afghanistan, a mission that would be focused on two things:  counterterrorism, and aiding and supporting and training Afghan troops.  As all these things are for the Department of Defense, that’s a complicated piece of business that requires a serious amount of training -- I mean, of planning, rather, for U.S. forces and with our NATO partners.  So this is not something that can drag on for very long.
Yes, ma’am.
Q    Thank you, Jay.  Finally, I got --
MR. CARNEY:  Oh, no, I’ve called on you before.
Q    Yes, on North Korea, does President Obama have any new policy towards North Korea this year?
MR. CARNEY:  Any new?
Q    New policy toward --
MR. CARNEY:  Oh, policy.  Our policy towards North Korea has not changed and our view is that North Korea needs to avail itself of the opportunity to end its isolation in the world by coming into compliance with its international obligations by ceasing to violate a series of UN Security Council resolutions, and our posture remains the same.
Q    So he will be approaching more aggressively to North Korea? 
MR. CARNEY:  I don’t have a new approach to announce.  We approach this issue as we have.
Q    I have another one.  It is reported that Iran and North Korea call for development of a super ICBM, intercontinental ballistic missiles.  Do you have anything on that?
MR. CARNEY:  I haven’t seen that report.  We have very clear policies and views with regards to both North Korea’s missile program and Iran’s, so I would point you to what we’ve said in the past about that.
Yes.
Q    Jay, back on the NSA speech tomorrow, will the President provide some clarity to what so far has been a really nebulous answer to the question of whether or not the mass collection of metadata has stopped even one terror plot?
MR. CARNEY:  I would urge you to wait 24 more hours and learn the answer.
Q    So that answer will be in the speech?
MR. CARNEY:  Well, the answer to whether he is going to address it will be in the speech.
Q    Jay, answering Chris’s question earlier, you talked about how LGBT Americans -- that the President wants to see action on ENDA but he wants to see it through Congress.  Why does the LGBT group have to wait when the President is willing to sign executive actions on things like the economy, on education, on gun violence?  What makes these issues dissimilar?
MR. CARNEY:  Well, I think, Jared, we've addressed this many times.  It is our belief that the best way to deal with employment discrimination practices is to pass the Employment Non-Discrimination Act, which is a broad piece of legislation that would apply broadly.  And that is where we have put our energy.  And I just don’t have any new information to convey to you with regards to questions about executive orders on this matter.
We are very focused on the potential for further action in the Congress -- for the progress that we've seen around the country and in Congress in recognizing that these are fundamental rights that ought to be recognized.  And we expect that Congress will, as I said, get on the road towards progress that so many in this country have been traveling on these issues.  So that’s where our energy is.  And we're going to keep pushing Congress to take action, keep pushing the House to take action. 
In the far back.  Yes.
Q    Just to follow up here, Jay.  Then on the flip side of that, then why are all of these other areas only able to get executive action if the President is using, as you're describing, as he's describing, the power of the phone to rally support?
MR. CARNEY:  Well, here's what we're doing, Jared -- I think he said, is that we have not -- we will continue to press forward for legislation, for cooperation and positive work with Congress everywhere we can.  And we saw, against the predictions of a lot of folks, passage in a bipartisan way of the Employment Non-Discrimination Act through the Senate, and just like we saw on immigration reform.  
We're going to keep pressing for legislative progress, but we're not going to put all of our effort only into that pursuit.  We're going to, the President is going to, as he has said frequently, use -- in addition to his capacity to work with Congress to try to pass legislation -- the power of his office through his pen and his phone to advance an agenda that benefits the middle class, benefits the American economy, leads to further job creation and to economic opportunity and mobility.  So this is not an either/or proposition, it's a both/and proposition. 
Q    But if it's a both/and, then when it comes to ENDA, when it comes to immigration reform, when it comes to extension of UI, the pen and the phone are both coming up short.
MR. CARNEY:  You can make the judgments you like.  We are pressing on all fronts.
Yes, ma'am.  In the back.
Q    Jay, per the President's proclamation on this Religious Freedom Day, can you give us some examples of how the Obama administration is promoting religious freedom across the globe?  And also, can you assure Americans that the Obama administration is doing everything it can to appeal for the Americans being held in Iran because of their Christian faith?
MR. CARNEY:  Absolutely, we are appealing to the Iranian government when it comes to those who are being held, and we have -- and I have raised it frequently from this podium.  And we continue to do that.
Broadly, we aggressively support religious freedom around the world and make clear our opposition to policies in countries that restrict religious freedom.  And that’s a broad, comprehensive effort.  But specifically on the issue of those being held in Iran on these related matters, as you've heard me, if you've been here, raise this in the past -- and we've noted that we bring these issues up all the time and press Iran on them -- we're going to continue to do that. 
As I've noted I think frequently over the past days and weeks, our pursuit of negotiations through the P5-plus-1 with Iran over its nuclear program and over our stated policy imperative of making sure that Iran does not develop or obtain a nuclear weapon, does not affect our posture when it comes to human rights abuses, when it comes to sponsoring terrorism or terrorist organizations.  And I think you've seen the actions that we've taken with regards to some of these other matters even as we have concurrently pursued negotiations with the P5-plus-1.
Thanks.
END
	1:23 P.M. EST
South Court Auditorium
	Eisenhower Executive Office Building
11:37 A.M. EST
MRS. OBAMA:  Good morning.  Thank you, everyone.  (Applause.)  Thank you so much.  Thank you.  You guys rest yourselves.  Thank you so much. 
It is really great to be here today with all of you.  We have with us today college and university presidents; we have experts and advocates, and civic and business leaders.  And I want to thank all of you for taking the time to be here today and for working every day to help young people pursue their education and build brighter futures for themselves and for our country.  
And I’d also like us to give a really big hand to Troy for sharing that story.  (Applause.)  That’s pretty powerful stuff, and presented so eloquently.  I know yesterday I met Troy -- he was nervous.  (Laughter.)  I don’t really know why you were nervous.  You're pretty awesome.
MR. SIMON:  Thank you.
MRS. OBAMA:  Troy's story reminds us all of the limitless capacity that lies within all of our young people no matter where they come from or how much money they have.  Troy is an example of why we all should care deeply about this issue.
And Troy, and millions of others like him, are why I care so much about this issue, and why in the coming years I'm going to be spending more and more of my time focusing on education.  Because as everyone here knows, education is the key to success for so many kids.  And my goal specifically is to reach out directly to young people and encourage them to take charge of their futures and complete an education beyond high school.  And I’m doing this because so often when we talk about education, we talk about our young people and what we need to do for them.  We talk about the programs we need to create for them, about the resources we need to devote to them. 
But we must remember that education is a two-way bargain.  And while there is so much more we must do for our kids, at the end of the day, as Troy described, the person who has the most say over whether or not a student succeeds is the student him or herself.  Ultimately, they are the ones sitting in that classroom.  They’re the ones who have to set goals for themselves and work hard to achieve those goals every single day.
So my hope is that with this new effort, that instead of talking about our kids, we talk with our kids.  I want to hear what’s going on in their lives.  I want to inspire them to step up and commit to their education so they can have opportunities they never even dreamed of.  I’m doing this because that story of opportunity through education is the story of my life, and I want them to know that it can be their story, too –- but only if they devote themselves to continuing their education past high school. 
And for many students, that might mean attending a college or university like the ones many of you represent.  For others, it might mean choosing a community college.  It might mean pursuing short-term professional training.  But no matter what they do, I want to make sure that students believe that they have what it takes to succeed beyond high school.  That’s going to be my message to young people. 
But here’s the thing:  I know that that message alone isn’t enough.  Like I said, this is a two-way street, and that means we all have to step up.  Because make no mistake about it, these kids are smart.  They will notice if we're not holding up our end of the bargain.  They will notice if we tell them about applying for college or financial aid, but then no one is there to help them choose the right school or fill out the right forms.  They will notice if we tell them that they're good enough to graduate from college, but then no college asks them to apply, no college invites them to visit their campus. 
And so we've got to re-commit ourselves to helping these kids pursue their education.  And as you discussed in your first panel today, one of the first steps is getting more underserved young people onto college campuses.  The fact is that right now we are missing out on so much potential because so many promising young people -- young people like Troy who have the talent it takes to succeed -- simply don’t believe that college can be a reality for them.  Too many of them are falling through the cracks, and all of you know that all too well.   
And that’s why so many of you are already finding new ways to reach out to the underserved students in your communities.  You’re helping them navigate the financial aid and college admissions process, and you’re helping them find schools that match their abilities and interests.  And I know from my own experience just how important all of that work is that you’re doing. 
See, the truth is that if Princeton hadn’t found my brother as a basketball recruit, and if I hadn’t seen that he could succeed on a campus like that, it never would have occurred to me to apply to that school -- never.  And I know that there are so many kids out there just like me -- kids who have a world of potential, but maybe their parents never went to college or maybe they’ve never been encouraged to believe they could succeed there. 
And so that means it’s our job to find those kids.  It’s our job to help them understand their potential and then get them enrolled in a college that can help them meet their needs.  But then we all know that just getting into school is only half the story, because once students are there, they have got to graduate.  And that’s not always easy, especially given what many of these kids are dealing with when they get to campus. 
Just think about it.  You just heard a snippet from Troy.  Just to make it to college, these kids have already overcome so much -- neighborhoods riddled with crime and drugs, moms and dads who weren’t around, too many nights when they had to go to bed hungry.  But as I tell these kids when I talk to them, we can’t think about those experiences that they've had as weaknesses -- just the opposite.  They’re actually strengths. 
In facing and overcoming these challenges, these kids have developed skills like grit and resilience that many of their peers will never be able to compete with -- never.  And when they get out in the world, those are the exact skills they will need to succeed.  And they will succeed.  
But imagine how hard it is to realize that when you first get to college.  You’re in a whole new world.  You might have trouble making friends because you don’t see any peers who come from a background like yours.  You might be worried about paying for classes, and food, and room and board because you have never had to set your own budget before.  You might be feeling guilty when you call home because Mom and Dad are wondering why you didn’t get a job so you could help support their family.  Those are the kinds of obstacles these kids are facing right from day one. 
But let’s be clear -- all of that isn’t just a challenge for them.  It’s a challenge for folks like us, who are committed to helping them succeed.  And make no mistake about it, that is our mission -- not simply giving speeches or raising money or hosting conferences, but to take real, meaningful action that will help our young people get into college, and more importantly, actually get their degree. 
And here’s the good news:  Time and again you all have shown that you have the experience, the passion and the resources to help these young people thrive.  For example, in recent decades, you’ve realized that students from across the socioeconomic spectrum have been coming to campus with more and more issues like eating disorders and learning disabilities, emotional challenges like depression and anxiety, and so much more.  And luckily, you all have not shied away from these issues.  I've seen it.  I worked at a university.  And you haven't said, these aren’t our problems; we’re a university, not a hospital or a counseling center.  No, you’ve stepped up. 
And while there’s still work left to do on these issues, you’re working every day to support these kids through treatment programs and outreach initiatives and support groups, because you know that these issues have a huge impact on whether students can learn and succeed at your school.  So now, as you begin to see more and more underserved students on your campuses, we need you to direct that same energy and determination toward helping these kids face their unique challenges. 
Now, fortunately, you’ve already got the expertise you need to address these issues.  And simply by building on what you're already doing best, you can make real differences for these kids.  And that’s what so many of you are doing with commitments you’ve made here at this summit. 
For example, every school offers financial aid services, but listen to what the University of Minnesota is doing.  They’re committing to expand those services to include financial literacy programs to help students and their families manage the costs of college.  And every school has advisors who desperately want their students to succeed.  Oregon Tech is committing to set up a text message program so that these advisors can connect more easily with students who need some extra encouragement or academic support. 
And every college has orientation programs or learning communities to help students transition to college.  And many of the schools here today are supplementing those programs by partnering with organizations like the Posse Foundation so that underserved students can connect and build a social network before they even step foot on campus.  And those were the types of resources that helped a kid like me not just survive but thrive at a school like Princeton.
When I first arrived at school as a first-generation college student, I didn’t know anyone on campus except my brother.  I didn’t know how to pick the right classes or find the right buildings.  I didn’t even bring the right size sheets for my dorm room bed.  (Laughter.)  I didn’t realize those beds were so long.  (Laughter.)  So I was a little overwhelmed and a little isolated. 
But then I had an opportunity to participate in a three-week, on-campus orientation program that helped me get a feel for the rhythm of college life.  And once school started, I discovered the campus cultural center, the Third World Center, where I found students and staff who came from families and communities that were similar to my own.  And they understood what I was going through.  They were there to listen when I was feeling frustrated.  They were there to answer the questions I was too embarrassed to ask anyone else. 
And if it weren’t for those resources and the friends and the mentors, I honestly don’t know how I would have made it through college.  But instead, I graduated at the top of my class, I went to law school -- and you know the rest.  (Laughter.)  So whether it’s aligning with an organization like Posse or offering a new advising or mentoring program, or creating a central space where students can connect with one another, you all can take simple steps that can determine whether these kids give up and drop out, or step up and thrive.
And that’s not just good for these young people, it’s good for your schools -- because if you embrace and empower these students, and if you make sure they have good campus experiences, then they’re going to stay engaged with your school for decades after they graduate.  They will be dressed up in school colors at homecoming games.  They’ll be asking to serve on your committees and advisory boards.  And they’ll be doing their part when fundraising season rolls around.  (Laughter.) 
So believe me, these will be some of the best alumni you could possibly ask for, because after everything these kids will have overcome to get into college and get through college, believe me, they will have all the skills they need to run our businesses and our labs, and to teach in our classrooms, and to lead our communities.
Just look at me, and look at Troy and the countless success stories from the organizations and schools represented here in this room.  That’s how we will win, this country.  We will win by tapping the full potential of all of our young people so that we can grow our economy and move this country forward.  And let me tell you that is something that my husband understands deeply, because his life story, just like mine, is rooted in education as well.  And as President, that is was drives him every single day -- his goal of expanding opportunity to millions of Americans who are striving to build better futures for themselves, for their families and for our country, as well.
So now it is my pleasure to introduce my husband, the President of the United States, Barack Obama.  (Applause.)  
THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you, everybody.  Everybody, please have a seat.  Have a seat.  Welcome to the White House, everybody.  And let me begin by thanking Troy and sharing his remarkable story.  I could not be more inspired by what he’s accomplished and can’t wait to see what he’s going to accomplish in the future. 
My wife -- it’s hard to speak after her.  (Laughter and applause.)  We were in the back, and Gene Sperling, who did extraordinary work putting this whole summit together, said, “Everybody is so excited that Michelle is here.”  (Laughter.)  And I said, well, what about me?  (Laughter.)  But you should be excited, her being here, because she brings a passion and a body of experience and a passion to this issue that is extraordinary.  And I couldn’t be prouder of the work she’s already done and the work I know that she’s going to keep on doing around these issues.
She did leave one thing out of her speech, and that is it’s her birthday tomorrow.  (Applause.)  So I want everybody to just keep that in mind.
Now, we are here for one purpose:  We want to make sure more young people have the chance to earn a higher education.  And in the 21st century economy, we all understand it’s never been more important.
The good news is, is that our economy is steadily growing and strengthening after the worst recession in a generation.  So we’ve created more than 8 million new jobs.  Manufacturing is growing, led by a booming auto industry.  Thanks to some key public investments in advances like affordable energy and research and development, what we’ve seen is not only an energy revolution in this country that bodes well for our future, but in areas like health care, for example, we’ve slowed the growth of health care costs in ways that a lot of people wouldn’t have anticipated as recently as five or ten years ago. 
So there are a lot of good things going on in the economy.  And businesses are starting to invest.  In fact, what we’re seeing are businesses overseas starting to say, instead of outsourcing, let’s insource back into the U.S.
All that bodes well for our future.  Here’s the thing, though:  We don’t grow just for the sake of growth.  We grow so that it translates into a growing middle class, people getting jobs, people being able to support their families, and people being able to pass something on to the next generation.  We want to restore the essential promise of opportunity and upward mobility that’s at the heart of America -- the notion that if you work hard, you can get ahead, you can improve your situation in life, you can make something of yourself.  The same essential story that Troy so eloquently told about himself. 
And the fact is it’s been getting harder to do that for a lot of people.  It is harder for folks to start in one place and move up that ladder -- and that was true long before the recession hit.  And that’s why I’ve said that in 2014, we have to consider this a year of action, not just to grow the economy, not just to increase GDP, not just to make sure that corporations are profitable and the stock market is doing well and the financial system is stable.  We’ve also got to make sure that that growth is broad-based and that everybody has a chance to access that growth and take advantage of it.  We’ve got to make sure that we’re creating new jobs and that the wages and benefits that go along with those jobs can support a family.  We have to make sure that there are new ladders of opportunity into the middle class, and that those ladders -- the rungs on those ladders are solid and accessible for more people.
Now, I’m going to be working with Congress where I can to accomplish this, but I’m also going to act on my own if Congress is deadlocked.  I’ve got a pen to take executive actions where Congress won’t, and I’ve got a telephone to rally folks around the country on this mission. 
And today is a great example of how, without a whole bunch of new legislation, we can advance this agenda.  We’ve got philanthropists and business leaders here; we’ve got leaders of innovative non-for-profits; we’ve got college presidents -- from state universities and historically black colleges to Ivy League universities and community colleges.  And today, more than 100 colleges and 40 organizations are announcing new commitments to help more young people not only go to, but graduate from college.  And that’s an extraordinary accomplishment, and we didn’t pass a bill to do it.
	   
	Everybody here is participating, I believe, because you know that college graduation has never been more valuable than it is today.  Unemployment for Americans with a college degree is more than a third lower than the national average.  Incomes -- twice as high as those without a high school diploma.  College is not the only path to success.  We’ve got to make sure that more Americans of all age are getting the skills that they need to access the jobs that are out there right now.  But more than ever, a college degree is the surest path to a stable, middle-class life.
And higher education speaks to something more than that.  The premise that we’re all created equal is the opening line in our American story.  And we don’t promise equal outcomes; we’ve strived to deliver equal opportunity -- the idea that success does not depend on being born into wealth or privilege, it depends on effort and merit.  You can be born into nothing and work your way into something extraordinary.  And to a kid that goes to college, maybe like Michelle, the first in his or her family, that means everything.
	 
	And the fact is, is if we hadn’t made a commitment as a country to send more of our people to college, Michelle, me, maybe a few of you would not be here today.  My grandfather wasn’t rich, but when he came home from the war he got the chance to study on the GI Bill.  I grew up with a single mom.  She had me when she was 18 years old.  There are a lot of circumstances where that might have waylaid her education for good.  But there were structures in place that allowed her then to go on and get a PhD.  Michelle’s dad was a shift worker at the city water plant; mom worked as a secretary.  They didn’t go to college.  But there were structures in place that allowed Michelle to take advantage of those opportunities. 
As Michelle mentioned, our parents and grandparents made sure we knew that we’d have to work for it, that nobody was going to hand us something, that education was not a passive enterprise -- you just tip your head over and somebody pours education into your ear.  (Laughter.)  You’ve got to work for it.  And I’ve told the story of my mother -- when I was living overseas, she’d wake me up before dawn to do correspondence courses in English before I went to the other school.  I wasn’t that happy about it.  (Laughter.)  But with that hard work -- but also with scholarships, also with student loans, and with support programs in place -- we were able to go to some of the best colleges in the country even though we didn’t have a lot of money.  Every child in America should have the same chance.
So over the last five years, we’ve worked hard in a variety of ways to improve these mechanisms to get young people where they need to be and to knock down barriers that are preventing them from getting better prepared for the economies that they’re going to face.  We’ve called for clearer, higher standards in our schools -- and 45 states and the District of Columbia have answered that call so far.  We’ve set a goal of training 100,000 new math and science teachers over the next 10 years, and the private sector has already committed to help train 40,000.  We’ve taken new steps to help students stay in school, and today the high school dropout rate is the lowest it has been in 40 years -- something that’s rarely advertised.  The dropout rate among Hispanic students, by the way, has been cut in half over the last decade. 
But we still have to hire more good teachers and pay them better.  We still have to do more training and development, and ensure that the curriculums are ones that maximize the chances for student success.  When young people are properly prepared in high school, we’ve got to make sure that they can afford to go to college, so we took on a student loan system that was giving billions of dollars of taxpayer dollars to big banks and we said, let’s give that money directly to students.  As a consequence, we were able to double the grant aid that goes to millions of students.  And today, more young people are earning college degrees than ever before. 
So we’ve made progress there, but as I’ve discussed with some of you, we’re still going to have to make sure that rising tuition doesn’t price the middle class out of a college education.  The government is not going to be able to continually subsidize a system in which higher education inflation is going up faster than health care inflation.  So I’ve laid out a plan to bring down costs and make sure that students are not saddled with debt before they even start out in life. 
Even after all these steps that we’ve taken over the last five years, we still have a long way to go to unlock the doors of higher education to more Americans and especially lower-income Americans.  We’re going to have to make sure they’re ready to walk through those doors.  The added value of a college diploma has nearly doubled since Michelle and I were undergraduates.  Unfortunately, today only 30 percent of low-income students enroll in college right after high school and, far worse, by their mid-twenties only 9 percent earn a bachelor’s degree. 
So if we as a nation can expand opportunity and reach out to those young people and help them not just go to college but graduate from college or university, it could have a transformative effect.  There is this huge cohort of talent that we’re not tapping.
Now, what this meeting today tells me is we’ve got dedicated citizens across the country who are ready to stand up and meet this challenge.  And what I want to really do is highlight some of the commitments that have been made here today.  So we know that not enough low-income students are taking the steps required to prepare for college.  That's why I'm glad the University of Chicago, my neighbor, and the place where Michelle and I both worked in the past, is announcing a $10 million College Success Initiative that will reach 10,000 high schools over the next five years.  It’s why iMentor, a mentoring program that began 15 years ago with just 49 students in the South Bronx, has committed to matching 20,000 new students with mentoring in more than 20 states over the next five years. 
We also know that too many students don’t apply to the schools that are right for them.  They may sometimes underestimate where they could succeed, where they could go.  There may be a mismatch in terms of what their aspirations are and the nature of what's offered at the school that's close by.  And they kind of assume, well, that's my only option.  So UVA, for example, is going experiment with new ways to contact high-achieving, low-income students directly and encourage them to apply.  Organizations like the College Board are going to work with colleges to make it easier for students to apply to more schools for free.
I know sometimes for those of you in university administrations, the perception may be that $100 application fees is not a big deal.  But for a lot of these students, that's enough of a barrier that they just don't end up applying.
Number three, we know that when it comes to college advising, and preparing for tests like the ACT and the SAT, low-income kids are not on a level playing field.  We call these standardized tests -- they're not standardized.  Malia and Sasha, by the time they're in seventh grade at Sidwell School here, are already getting all kinds of advice and this and that and the other.  The degree of preparation that many of our kids here are getting in advance of actually taking this test tilts the playing field.  It's not fair.  And it's gotten worse. 
I was telling Michelle, when I was taking the SAT I just barely remembered to bring a pencil.  I mean, that's how much preparation I did.  (Laughter.)  But the truth of the matter is, is that we don't have a level playing field when it comes to so-called standardized tests.  So we've got a young man here today named Lawrence Harris who knows this better than most.  Lawrence went to the University of Georgia, and like a lot of first-generation college students it wasn’t easy for him.  He had to take remedial classes.  He had to work two part-time jobs to make ends meet.  At one point, he had to leave school for a year while he helped support his mom and his baby brother.  Those are the kinds of just day-to-day challenges that a lot of these young people with enormous talent are having to overcome.  Now, he stuck with it.  He graduated. 
	 
	But now he’s giving back.  He’s made it his mission to help other young people like him graduate, as a college advisor at Clarke Central High School in Athens, Georgia.  And today the National College Advising Corps, the program that placed Lawrence in Clarke Central, is announcing plans to add 129 more advisors who will serve more than 80,000 students over the next three years.
Finally, we know that once low-income students arrive on campus -- Michelle I think spoke eloquently to her own personal experience on this -- they often learn that even if they were at the top of their high school class, they still have a lot of catching up to do with respect to some of their peers in the classroom.  Bunker Hill Community College is addressing this by giving more incoming students the chance to start catching up over the summer before their freshman year.  And we’ve got 22 states and the District of Columbia who have joined together in a commitment to dramatically increase the number of students who complete college-level math and English their first year.   
So these are just a sampling of the more than 100 commitments that your organizations and colleges are making here today.  And that’s an extraordinary first step.  But we’ve got more colleges and universities than this around the country.  We’ve got more business leaders around the country and philanthropies around the country.  And so we have to think of this as just the beginning; we want to do something like this again, and we want even more colleges and universities and businesses and non-for-profits to take part. 
For folks who are watching this who were not able be here today, we want you here next time.  Start thinking about your commitments now.  We want you to join us.  For those who were able to make commitments today, I want to thank you for doing your part to make better the life of our country -- because what you’re doing here today means that there are a bunch of young people, like Troy and like Michelle and like me, who suddenly may be able to see a whole new world open up before -- that they didn’t realize was there.  
So I’ll end with a great story that I think speaks to this.  There’s a former teacher here today named Nick Ehrmann.  Where’s Nick?  So here’s Nick right here.  Five years ago, Nick founded a New York City nonprofit called Blue Engine, and they recruit recent college graduates to work as teaching assistants in public high schools that serve low-income communities, teaming up to help students build the skills they need to enter college ready for college. 
The first group of students to work with those teaching assistants are seniors now.  One of them, Estiven Rodriguez, who also is here today -- where is he?  There he is -- good-looking, young guy right here.  (Laughter.)  Could not speak a word of English when he moved to the United States from the Dominican Republic at the age of nine.  Didn’t speak much more English by the time he entered sixth grade. 
Today, with the support of a tightly knit school community, he’s one of the top students in his senior class at Washington Heights Expeditionary Learning School, or WHEELS.  Last month, he and his classmates put on their WHEELS sweatshirts, unfurled a banner, waved flags and marched down the streets of Washington Heights in New York City through cheering crowds.  You would have thought it was the Macy’s parade.  (Laughter.)  But the crowds on the sidewalk were parents and teachers and neighbors.  The flags were college pennants.  The march was to the post office, where they mailed in their college applications.  (Applause.)  And Estiven just heard back -- this son of a factory worker who didn’t speak much English just six years ago won a competitive scholarship to attend Dickinson College this fall.  (Applause.)
So everywhere you go you've got stories like Estiven's and you've got stories like Troy's.  But we don't want these to be the exceptions.  We want these to be the rule.  That's what we owe our young people and that's what we owe this country.  We all have a stake in restoring that fundamental American idea that says:  It doesn’t matter where you start, what matters is where you end up.  And as parents and as teachers, and as business and philanthropic and political leaders -- and as citizens -- we've all got a role to play. 
So I'm going to spend the next three years as President playing mine.  And I look forward to working with you on the same team to make this happen.  Thank you very much, everybody.  (Applause.)
END
	12:15 P.M. EST
