
Advancing Clean Energy Technology Innovation, Cutting Energy Bills, and Creating Jobs 

	President Obama is committed to taking responsible steps to address climate change, promote clean energy and energy efficiency, drive innovation, and ensure a cleaner, more stable environment for future generations. That is why at Senator Reid’s National Clean Energy Summit later today, he is announcing a robust set of executive actions and private sector commitments to accelerate America’s transition to cleaner sources of energy and ways to cut energy waste.

	These actions build on state leadership, all across America, to continue to expand opportunities to install energy saving technologies in households today, particularly those that need it most, while driving the development of innovative, low-cost clean energy technologies for tomorrow. 

	Last year, the United States brought online as much solar energy every three weeks as it did in all of 2008, and the solar industry added jobs 10 times faster than the rest of the economy.  Since the beginning of 2010, the average cost of a solar electric system has dropped by 50 percent. In fact, distributed solar prices fell 10 to 20 percent in 2014 alone and currently 44 states have pricing structures that encourage increased penetration of distributed energy resources. 

	Americans are also more empowered to capture opportunities to improve efficiency and cut energy waste. In fact, up to one third of households can track their energy use and learn ways to make choices on how to save on their energy bills. Since President Obama took office, the U.S. Department of Energy has already put in place appliance efficiency standards that will save American consumers nearly $480 billion on their utility bills through 2030, and the Environmental Protection Agency’s ENERGY STAR Program continues to help save consumers more than $34 billion per year going forward. 

	The executive actions and private sector commitments President Obama is announcing today will continue to promote the use and development of smart, simple, low-cost technologies to help households save on their energy bills and help America transition to cleaner, and more distributed energy resources. These include:


		Making $1 billion in additional loan guarantee authority available and announcing new guidelines for distributed energy projects utilizing innovative technology and states looking to access this financing;

		Unlocking residential Property-Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) financing for single-family housing to make is easier for Americans to invest in clean energy technologies;

		Launching a new HUD and DOE program to provide home owners with a simple way to measure and improve the energy efficiency of their homes, by increasing homeowners borrowing power;

		Creating a DOD Privatized Housing Solar Challenge, and announcing companies are committing to provide solar power to housing on over 40 military bases across the United States, while saving military families money on energy bills and making military communities more energy secure;

		Announcing $24 million for 11 projects in seven states to develop innovative solar technologies that double the amount of energy each solar panel can produce from the sun;

		Approving a transmission line that will support bringing online a 485-megawatt photovoltaic facility that will be constructed in Riverside County and produce enough renewable energy to power more than 145,000 homes; and

		Creating an Interagency Task Force to Promote a Clean Energy Future for All Americans; and announcing independent commitments from local governments, utilities, and businesses that are stepping up to drive energy efficiency in more than 300,000 low-income households and investing more than $220 million in energy saving activities for veterans and low-income customers to help decrease their energy bills.


	Today’s actions build on a longstanding commitment to create a clean energy economy for all Americans, will help states meet the targets in the Clean Power Plan announced earlier this month, and set us on a path to reach the President’s goals, including:


		Achieving an economy-wide target to reduce emissions by 26%-28% below 2005 levels in 2025;

		Increase the share of renewables – beyond hydropower – in their respective electricity generation mixes to the level of 20% by 2030;

		Installing 300 megawatts of renewable energy across federally subsidized housing by 2020; and

		Doubling energy productivity by 2030.


EXECUTIVE ACTIONS TO DRIVE CLEAN ENERGY AND CUT ENERGY WASTE

	To continue to reinforce American leadership in deploying clean energy and cutting energy waste while creating jobs and reducing carbon pollution, the Administration is announcing the following actions:

Making $1 Billion in Additional Loan Guarantee Authority Available and Announcing New Guidelines for Distributed Energy Projects Utilizing Innovative Technology:  Distributed Energy Projects are currently driving innovation and transforming U.S. energy markets. Technologies such as rooftop solar, energy storage, smart grid technology, and methane capture for oil and gas wells, solve key energy challenges.  Catalyzing these technologies and demonstrating the viability of these markets would create economic opportunity, strengthen energy security, transform certain energy markets, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.  To accelerate the pace of innovation in distributed energy, the Department of Energy is:


Inviting Innovative Distributed Energy Projects to Apply to More Than $10 Billion in Current Loan Guarantees: The Department of Energy is supplementing its current loan guarantee solicitations to invite applications for Distributed Energy Projects. The current Solicitations, totaling more than $10 billion in loan guarantee authority, are now clearly unlocked to support scale up of Distributed Energy Projects utilizing innovative technology. Today’s announcement includes guidance from the Department on how a Distributed Energy Project transaction could be properly structured.

Making Available $1 Billion in Additional Loan Guarantee Authority for New, Innovative Projects:  As part of its new push for Distributed Energy Projects utilizing innovative technology, the Department of Energy is providing up to $1 billion in additional loan guarantee authority through its current Solicitations for new Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Projects and Fossil Energy Projects.  This significantly boosts the resources available to new applicants.

Providing Clarity for States and State Green Banks on How to Work with the Department’s Loan Programs Office:  The Department of Energy is also issuing new guidance making clear that state-affiliated financial entities, including state green banks, may submit applications for Eligible Projects.  That means any state or state-affiliated entity that satisfies all other requirements for qualification as a borrower can submit applications for Eligible Projects, including Distributed Energy Projects.  In addition, the Department made clear today that state and state-affiliated entities, including state green banks, may participate in Distributed Energy Projects as lenders or co-lenders, off-takers or equity providers. 


Announcing New Programs to Accelerate the Deployment of Clean Energy Technologies Available Today: For more than 80 years, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) has provided low-income households and underserved communities access to safe and affordable mortgage credit. And with today’s announcement, FHA will provide additional opportunities for borrowers with FHA insured loans to benefit from affordable financing of home energy improvements, saving them money, and improving the environment. Today more than 7.6 million households in the U.S. live in FHA-insured single family housing. To accelerate this transition and drive the deployment of renewable energy and energy efficiency in single family housing, the Department of Housing and Urban Development is taking the following actions:



Unlocking Residential Property-Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Financing: PACE is an innovative mechanism for financing energy efficiency and renewable energy improvements. PACE financing allows homeowners to benefit from energy improvements immediately and pay back the cost over time through their property taxes. When the property is sold, the remaining PACE loan stays with the more energy efficient property and the next owner is responsible for repaying the loan. PACE programs have the potential to unlock alternative sources of capital to accelerate renewable energy and efficiency retrofits for households, and reduce energy costs for consumers.

			To remove existing barriers and accelerate the use of PACE financing for single family housing, HUD’s Federal Housing Administration (FHA) is announcing today that, under guidance to be issued soon, properties with subordinated PACE loans can be purchased and refinanced with an FHA insured mortgage. HUD is issuing a preliminary statement indicating the conditions under which borrowers purchasing or refinancing properties with existing PACE assessments will be eligible to use FHA-insured financing. Secretary Castro is also sending a letter to Governors describing the options the FHA offers to make it easier for consumers to undertake energy efficiency and renewable energy improvements in their homes. FHA’s evolving PACE guidance is also being informed by ongoing conversations with the Federal Housing Finance Agency. 

			This action is distinct from the multifamily PACE guidance for the State of California that HUD released earlier this year. The guidance clarified the circumstances under which HUD will approve unsubordinated PACE financing on HUD-assisted and -insured multifamily housing in California in order to facilitate the establishment of a California Multifamily PACE Pilot.


Increasing Homeowners Borrowing Power to Make Energy Efficiency Improvements: HUD’s FHA Energy Efficient Home Program and DOE are launching a program to provide potential homeowners with an easy way to measure and improve the energy efficiency of their homes. Under the new HUD and DOE Home Energy Score partnership, in areas where the Home Energy Score is available, single family households will be able to increase their access to financing tools to make energy efficiency improvements. DOE’s Home Energy Score offers a “miles per gallon” type rating to estimate a home’s energy use on a 10-point scale. A “1” corresponds to the least energy efficient homes and a “10” corresponds to the most energy efficient homes, while the average U.S. home will score a “5.” Through this new partnership, homebuyers or homeowners who want to obtain an FHA-insured purchase or refinance mortgage for a single family home that receives a Home Energy Score of 6 or higher will be eligible to increase their income qualifying ratio by 2 percentage points above the standard Single Family FHA limit, making it easier to secure financing to make these improvements.


DOD Privatized Housing Solar Challenge:  Approximately 72 MWs of solar energy producing infrastructure has been installed on over 60,000 Department of Defense (DOD) privatized housing units to date. To amplify this progress, earlier this summer, DOD and the White House Council on Environmental Quality convened the companies that own the privatized housing units to share best practices and encourage them to set goals for increasing the amount of solar energy generated on privatized military housing through the end of 2016.

	Today, four companies are committing to provide solar power to housing on over 40 military bases across the United States, while saving military families money on energy bills and making military communities more energy secure. These commitments total over 233 MWs, reducing annual carbon emissions by approximately 324 metric tons.


Balfour Beatty: Balfour Beatty Communities has joined forces with DOD to install solar at the following 12 military installations across the US: Lakehurst, NJ; New London CT; Long Island, NY; Newport, RI; Saratoga Springs, NY; Ft Bliss, TX; Ft Detrick, MD; Wheaton, MD; Ft Hamilton, NY; Ft Leonard Wood, MO; West Point, NY; and Ft Carson, CO.  This effort will generate approximately 63.35MW of solar power and continue to reduce carbon emissions across Balfour Beatty Communities’ Military Family Housing portfolio.

Corvias: Corvias Solutions (Corvias) along with Onyx Renewable Partners, is working with DOD to install solar on 12 military installations across the United States. This effort is expected to generate approximately 100MW of solar power that will provide increased energy security and reduce annual carbon emissions by approximately 92,000 tons. Corvias will continue to innovate with its Army partner and has received initial approval to move forward on solar installations at Aberdeen Proving Grounds and Fort Meade, MD; Fort Bragg, NC; Fort Polk, LA; Fort Rucker, AL; Fort Sill, OK; and Fort Riley, KS.

Lincoln Military Housing: Lincoln Military Housing is leveraging the current 20 MW system being installed on privatized military housing in San Diego to install a new proposed solar project that would add 60 MW of power generating capabilities to its national portfolio of privatized military housing. Lincoln Military Housing provides more than 31,000 family homes for military members across the United States.

United Communities: United Communities, which provides homes for 2,000 military families living at Joint Base McGuire Dix Lakehurst in New Jersey, will deploy an additional 10 MW of cost-effective, private sector solar generated electricity serving 1,147 of these homes in 2016. This new project will increase solar generation to at least 16 MW, representing 90% of total electricity consumed by the residents of these privatized military homes. The significant electricity savings generated from the additional ground-mounted solar array will directly benefit families living on the base.


Pushing the Bar on Low-Cost Solar Technology: The Advanced Research Projects Agency – Energy (ARPA-E)’s Micro-scale Optimized Solar-cell Arrays with Integrated Concentration (MOSAIC) Program is announcing $24 million for 11 projects in seven states across the country to develop innovative solar technologies to achieve a 50 percent increase in the amount of energy each solar panel can produce from the sun, while reducing costs and the space required to generate solar energy.


California Institute of Technology (Pasadena, CA) - Micro-Optical Tandem Luminescent Solar Concentrator 

Glint Photonics, Inc. (Burlingame, CA) - Stationary Wide-Angle Concentrator PV System 

Palo Alto Research Center (Palo Alto, CA) - Micro-Chiplet Printer for MOSAIC 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Cambridge, MA) - Integrated Micro-Optical Concentrator Photovoltaics with Lateral Multijunction Cells 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Cambridge, MA) - Wafer-Level Integrated Concentrating Photovoltaics 

Panasonic Boston Laboratory (Newton, MA) - Low Profile CPV Panel with Sun Tracking for Rooftop Installation 

University of Rochester (Rochester, NY) - Planar Light Guide Concentrated Photovoltaics 

Semprius, Inc. (Durham, NC) - Micro-Scale Ultra-High Efficiency CPV/Diffuse Hybrid Arrays Using Transfer Printing 

The Pennsylvania State University (University Park, PA) - Wide-Angle Planar Microtracking Microcell CPV 

Texas A&M University Engineering Experiment Station (College Station, TX) - Waveguiding Solar Concentrator 

Sharp Laboratories of America (Camas, WA) - A High-Efficiency Flat Plate PV with Integrated Micro-PV atop a 1-Sun Panel 


Approving a New Transmission Line to Deploy Solar Energy: Today, U.S. Secretary of the Interior Sally Jewell announced that the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) has approved the Blythe Mesa Solar project in California and its transmission line that will support bringing online the 485-megawatt photovoltaic facility that will be constructed in Riverside County and produce enough renewable energy to power more than 145,000 homes in California.

Creating an Interagency Task Force to Promote a Clean Energy Future for All Americans: Building on the Administration’s initiative to increase access to solar energy for all Americans, and recognizing the importance of ensuring that the communities most likely to be impacted by climate change must also share in the benefits a clean energy future, today, President Obama is creating an Interagency Task Force to Promote a Clean Energy Future for All Americans, that will work in partnership with states and community organizations to identify opportunities to improve energy efficiency and scale up the deployment renewable energy in low- and moderate- income communities. The Task Force, whose participants include the Executive Office of the President, DOE, EPA, HUD, USDA, DOL, and Treasury, will work to enhance this shared goal through three key mechanisms:

	The expanded EnergyShare will be a collaborative model for how utilities can work with state agencies and non-profits to provide sustainable savings for those facing financial hardships through a combination of energy assistance and energy efficiency.


Leveraging the Clean Energy Incentive Program:  The Task Force will support low-income communities through the development and implementation of the Clean Power Plan’s Clean Energy Incentive Program. The CEIP is a voluntary “matching fund” program that states can use to incentivize early investment in eligible wind and solar projects, as well as demand-side energy efficiency projects, including those that are implemented in low-income communities.  In particular, the Task Force will help to identify Administration-wide funding and technical assistance for states, cities, and organizations, easing access to the Federal tools and programs available to increase energy efficiency and deploy renewable energy in low- and moderate- income communities. This fall, EPA is also releasing a new resource that will highlight effective programs and policies at the state and local levels that have led to the successful adoption of energy efficiency and renewable energy in low-income communities.

Enhancing Federal Resources for Low-and Moderate Income Communities: Building on the programs already available  the Task Force will review the Administration’s programs and policies relating to the availability of clean energy and renewable energy programs nationwide, including within low- and moderate-income communities, with the goal of enhancing funding available in both our existing programs and through the FY2017 budget process.

Identifying Private Sector Partners and Foundation Support: Today, the President is calling on mayors and county officials, the private sector, and foundations to step up and support the deployment of clean and efficient technologies in low-and moderate-income communities. The Task Force will facilitate partnerships between communities and private sector organizations. Already, the following organizations are stepping up to drive energy efficiency in more than 300,000 low-income households and investing more than $220 million in energy saving activities for veterans and low-income customers to help decrease their energy bills:
		

The American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE) is committing to advancing energy efficiency in low-income households in the next year through:
				

						Providing technical assistance and developing resources for utilities and state agencies so that energy efficiency programs can better serve low- and moderate-income households, especially those residing in affordable multifamily buildings.

						Working with HUD to increase energy efficiency investments in subsidized housing stock. This includes encouraging utilities to provide whole-building energy data and targeted programs that serve this sector. 

						Providing technical assistance and resources to local governments so that citywide energy efficiency efforts reach low- and moderate-income households and small businesses in these communities. ACEEE will also work with local governments to ensure that these energy efficiency efforts be considered as strategies within state and utility energy planning.

						Producing a best practice guide on community-based lending for energy efficiency in low- and moderate-income communities.



Bosch is committing to dedicating part of its sales force to focus specifically on outreach to school districts in low income communities, as well as in extreme climate areas, where energy resiliency is paramount. These activities could include:
				

						Working to educate stakeholders and decision makers in low-income communities about the opportunities and benefits of high-efficiency buildings, particularly schools.

						Sharing critical information with stakeholders on how projects can be implemented in their regions, including case studies from existing Bosch school improvement projects.

						Providing best practices on how other schools integrate energy efficiency projects into student curriculum and reinforce teaching and learning about energy conservation in the classroom.



CLEAResult and E4thefuture are announcing a new initiative that will establish a deeper Weatherization program that will focus on recruiting and training Native American professionals to become energy auditors. The initial scope of this project will have a goal of identifying as many as 10 new energy professionals from the Native American tribal communities that CLEAResult serves in Michigan. This initiative will demonstrate that residential energy efficiency works to not only lower energy costs for low income consumers but also strengthen communities, create jobs and improve the housing conditions for low income consumers.

Connecticut Weatherization Assistance Program (CT WAP), their Community Action-based subgrantees, utility partners, and strategic financial partners have identified a range of energy efficiency opportunities that are the result of innovative efforts to expand the reach of the U.S. WAP and other residential efficiency programs via community outreach to underserved areas. CT WAP and its subgrantees have prepared needs assessments related to Urban Revitalization programs combined with health and safety stakeholders on the state and local levels and have established key relationships with renewable energy, heating system replacement, community lighting and client education services. CT WAP estimates that 1,000 homes per year (2,800 persons) could benefit from additional efficiency efforts above and beyond what services are currently being delivered in the state, or more than 4,000 units (11,200 persons) over a 48-month period. Given the existing capacity and workload, contracting and expansion of services would require a ramp up period of 30 to 60 days and production and public benefit could be realized within 90 days of agreements.

Commons Energy in Ohio is making a new commitment to provide service to low and moderate income populations in Efficiency Smart’s service territory. This builds on their existing commitment to comprehensive total-energy solution for owners of small to mid-size multifamily affordable housing, education, health care, and community and municipal facilities who may have difficulty accessing capital, technical skills, and implementation services.

The Compact of Mayors, a global coalition of mayors and city officials that have pledged to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance resilience to climate change, is committing to further the uptake of clean energy technologies, including in low-income communities, and to track overall progress. U.S. Cities are taking significant steps to reduce emissions, but the only way to measure progress is through a transparent and consistent system that provides accountability.  19 U.S. Cities have already signed onto the Compact, and 15 more are announcing their commitment today, including:
				

						Atlanta

						Austin

						Bridgeport

						Camuy (PR)

						Chicago

						Chula Vista

						Grand Rapids

						King County

						New York

						Oakland

						San Francisco

						Santa Monica

						Seattle

						West Hollywood

						West Palm Beach

						The President is challenging all Mayors to publicly commit to a climate action plan ahead of the Paris UN meeting, and has set a goal of having at least 100 US cities that have signed onto the Compact by the end of November.   



The Community Preservation Corporation (CPC), a nonprofit mortgage lender providing leading-edge capital solutions to the complex issues facing communities throughout New York State, has committed to underwriting the projected energy reduction savings from conservation projects into its first mortgage financing procedure. CPC will work with their partners at both the state and municipal level including the Governor’s office, HCR, NYSERDA, and the New York City Energy Efficiency Corporation to create and preserve over 750 units of high-performance housing for low- and moderate-income households. First by capturing the savings of energy efficiency and water conservation measures in the loan underwriting, then monitoring the project through occupancy to track realized savings, CPC aims to create synergies within the multifamily lending industry that lead to deeper savings and additional stakeholder participation.

Direct Energy has provided over 1,700 Programmable Thermostats to eligible low-income households in Texas, under a program created by the Public Utility Commission of Texas, in order to help those households better manage their energy usage.  Going forward, Direct Energy will continue this effort by partnering with Nest Labs and others to reach as many additional households as possible. 

Dominion Virginia Power – in collaboration with more than 30 state agencies, non-profit organizations and other community stakeholders –  will invest $57 million ($42 million of which is funded by shareholders) for an expanded EnergyShare program starting September 1 to provide financial assistance, weatherization services, and educational outreach to people living with disabilities, homeless veterans, seniors, and low-income customers.
				

						Dominion will link eligible individuals with weatherization providers and fund project work providing long-term, sustainable savings to customers;

						In partnership with the Virginia Department of Veterans Services, Dominion will provide approximately 1,000 vouchers annually for $500 each to veterans being housed through rapid re-housing or permanent supporting housing programs;

						Working with the Virginia Department for Aging and Rehabilitative Services, Dominion will provide approximately 1,000 vouchers annually for $500 each to individuals living with disabilities, thereby providing an important wrap-around service.

						The program includes significant community outreach and energy conservation education for all customers;

						The overall program will benefit tens of thousands of customers. 




			The expanded EnergyShare will be a collaborative model for how utilities can work with state agencies and non-profits to provide sustainable savings for those facing financial hardships through a combination of energy assistance and energy efficiency.


Energy Efficiency for All (EEFA), a partnership between the National Housing Trust, Natural Resources Defense Council, Energy Foundation and Elevate Energy with funding support from The JPB Foundation, will help low income renters gain access to $170 million in new private and public resources for energy efficiency in affordable multifamily housing. EEFA will accomplish this commitment by bringing together the energy and housing sectors to tap the benefits of energy efficiency for millions of Americans living on limited incomes. EEFA’s mission is to make multifamily homes healthy and affordable, while helping utilities achieve their energy efficiency goals and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.  EEFA has energy, health, and housing partners in 12 states and supports a national learning network.

Energy Optimizers, USA and Miller Valentine are announcing a new partnership to develop and implement energy efficiency renovation projects in over 12,000 low-income properties throughout 13 states.  This program is estimated to save more than $21,600,000 for the building owners and occupants and create more than 6,500 jobs.  This project will include LED lighting, solar hot water systems, energy efficient HVAC systems and insulation.

GRID Alternatives will ensure every low-income solar customer served by GRID receives comprehensive energy efficiency education, and will enroll eligible families into locally or federally funded low-income weatherization programs. This service ensures eligible low-income families receive energy efficiency services at no cost and maximizes their financial benefit from weatherization and solar installations.

The Indiana Housing and Community Development Authority commits to serving approximately 200-300 households via a Healthy Homes Program to address deferral issues preventing homes from being weatherization-ready. The program will address roof leaks, mold, moisture, electrical systems and other issues that frequently lead to deferral of weatherization jobs. The focus of this program is not only to make the home weatherization-ready, but to address issues that may affect the health of families served. Additional hazards to be addressed might include eliminating trip hazards, installing hand rails, and addressing asthma triggers. Approximately 200 to 300 people will benefit from this program, which is slated to start April 1, 2016.

Lime Energy is committing to provide energy efficient facility upgrades for over 1,000 small businesses in low-to-moderate income communities. Lime Energy has already completed more than 100,000 such projects creating thousands of jobs and driving over $1 billion dollars back into the local economies of the communities that it serves.

The Maryland Public Service Commission is announcing that no later than the Spring of 2016 it will establish energy efficiency goals specific to limited-income programs administered as part of the statewide EmPOWER Maryland initiative, which will require targeted investment in this this critical sector and may require a ramp-up of existing programs in 2016 and beyond. The new goals will build on a framework of accountability designed to increase the reach of the EmPOWER limited-income programs to as many eligible participants as possible.  Since 2009, the EmPOWER Maryland program has weatherized, at no additional cost to the homeowner, 16,795 limited-income households, resulting in an average savings per limited-income household of 2,995 kWh per year.

The National Housing Trust/Enterprise commits to improving energy intensity of its portfolio by at least 30 percent by 2025; developing an organization-wide plan with energy reduction milestones to achieve energy savings commitment; sharing information on the energy efficiency implementation models used to achieve the energy savings commitment; making available portfolio-wide energy performance information within 12 months and tracking progress on annual basis.

The National Association for State Community Services Programs (NASCSP) is committed to creating dynamic partnerships at the national level that will mobilize groups in unison to create national awareness for creative approaches to energy efficiency that reduce the energy burden for low-income families. NASCSP will ensure that the creative approaches to energy efficiency being accomplished in the Weatherization network do not go unnoticed. They are committed to effectively shining a spotlight on the work of their membership and acting as the single-point-of-contact for the Weatherization network on all matters related to energy efficiency initiatives. The success of these efforts will be shared with all programs to encourage others to find ways to implement innovative practices in Weatherization to assist low-income families being served by the Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP), including the commitments from the Connecticut Weatherization Assistance Program, Dominion Virginia Power, The Indiana Housing and Community Development Authority, and Southwestern Regional Housing and Community Development Corporation.

New York State Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) is announcing it has submitted a proposal to the New York Public Service Commission (PSC) to establish a new $5 billion ten year Clean Energy Fund (CEF), of which $78 million each year is proposed to be directed to increasing energy affordability and access to clean energy options for low and moderate income (LMI) communities and households. The New York Governor's office has created an inter-agency working group to identify and pursue strategies to help implement and maximize the impact of NYSERDA's LMI commitment under the CEF. 

New York State Homes and Community Renewal (HCR) has established a new, optional Passive House track for applicants seeking competitive points for Green Building under its August 2015 Request for Proposals for Unified Funding Programs (RFP) to encourage a significant increase in the energy efficiency of New York’s affordable housing stock.  This RFP makes funding available through eleven state housing programs.  To obtain the competitive points under this track, projects may qualify under either the Passive House Institute US (PHIUS), or the International Passive House Institute (iPHI) programs.  HCR intends to work closely with NYSERDA to monitor the ongoing energy use intensity of any Passive House projects that may be selected for funding under the RFP, in order to provide valuable data to the market to accelerate the trend toward construction of Passive House certified affordable multifamily buildings.

Opower is committing to serve 300,000 additional low-income households and driving $3 million more in energy savings over the next year, helping low-income families save a total of 30,000 MWh and $3 million on their utility bills.

Southwestern Regional Housing and Community Development Corporation will provide a pathway to alternative energy for up to eleven new-build homes. Each home will have a 1kw residential wind turbine installed as part of a package of energy efficiency measures. The wind power will reduce the energy burden for families served, especially when combined with energy efficient methods of home building. The success of this pilot program could be used to launch similar, larger-scale projects in New Mexico. The New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority is also launching a low-interest loan program to install high-efficiency furnaces for low-income families at a discounted cost in an effort to connect vulnerable households with reliable and efficient heating systems. The initiative will serve approximately 50 households per year and will start November 10.

Tony Fadell and Matt Rogers, co-founders of Nest Labs, have committed to donate 500 Nest Learning Thermostats for a pilot program with the Community and Economic Development Association (CEDA) of Cook County in Chicago.  Studies have shown that Nest thermostats can save people an average of 10-15% on their heating and cooling bills, and the Nest-CEDA program will specifically examine their use to benefit low-income weatherization projects. 




	WASHINGTON, DC – Today, the President’s Commission on White House Fellowships announced the appointment of the 2015-2016 class of White House Fellows. The Fellows come from diverse backgrounds, and varied professions, and have demonstrated a strong commitment to public service and leadership. The 2015-2016 class of Fellows and their biographies are included below.

	The White House Fellows program was created in 1964 by President Lyndon B. Johnson to give promising American leaders “first hand, high-level experience with the workings of the Federal government, and to increase their sense of participation in national affairs.” This unique opportunity to work within our nation’s government is designed to encourage active citizenship and a lifelong commitment to service. The Fellows take part in an education program designed to broaden their knowledge of leadership, policy formulation, and current affairs. Community service is another essential element of the program, and Fellows participate in service projects throughout their year in Washington, D.C.

	Selection as a White House Fellow is highly competitive and based on a record of professional achievement, evidence of leadership potential, and a proven commitment to public service. Each Fellow must possess the knowledge and skills necessary to contribute meaningfully at senior levels of the Federal government. Throughout its history, the program has fostered leaders in many fields, including government, business, law, media, medicine, education, diplomacy, and the military. Additional information about the White House Fellows program is available at www.whitehouse.gov/fellows.

2015-2016 Class of White House Fellows:

C. Spencer Abbot, Yorktown, VA, is a Commander in the United States Navy. He recently served as Commanding Officer of Strike-Fighter Squadron 27 in Atsugi, Japan. The squadron was recognized with the “Battle E” award as the top FA-18E/F squadron in the Pacific Fleet for 2014. He established the first afloat foreign language program for a carrier air wing, and organized a partnership with a Japanese elementary school. In 2001 and 2003, he flew combat missions at the outsets of the conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq. He then studied Spanish at the Defense Language Institute, and worked as a volunteer diver at the Monterey Bay Aquarium. He later served as an EF-18 Hornet exchange pilot with the Spanish Air Force. He received the 2008 Exceptional Pilot Award from among all Navy pilots after combat operations in Iraq.  He worked in Haiti following the 2010 earthquake, and coordinated with the Japanese government from U.S. Embassy Tokyo following the 2011 tsunami. Author of a number of published articles, he served as Brigade Commander at the U.S. Naval Academy, holds a Master’s Degree and Ph.D. in International Relations from the Fletcher School, and an Executive M.B.A., taken in Spanish, from Instituto de Empresa in Madrid.

Teeb Al-Samarrai, Oakland, CA, is a physician and epidemiologist who served as Deputy Health Officer and Tuberculosis Controller at the Santa Clara County Public Health Department in California. Her work focused on immigrant and refugee health issues, particularly tuberculosis and hepatitis B. Prior to this, Teeb served as a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Epidemic Intelligence Service Officer at the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. She’s worked internationally in diverse settings and in 2010, participated in CDC’s emergency response to the Haiti earthquake. She completed her internal medicine residency at Yale-New Haven Hospital, where she partnered with a local NGO, Integrated Refugee and Immigrant Services, to establish a multidisciplinary, patient-centered refugee clinic. For this work, she was recognized with the Fred L. Sachs Award and Chief Residents’ Service Award. Her work has been published in peer-reviewed journals, presented at national meetings, and cited in the New York Times. Teeb served on the California Tuberculosis Controllers Association Executive Committee and the TEDMED Editorial Advisory Board. She graduated as a Regents and Alumni Scholar from the University of California, Los Angeles with a B.S. in Neuroscience. She received her M.D. and an M.S. in Neuroscience from Yale University.

Andrew Anderson, Douglas, WY, is a Major in the U.S. Air Force.  He recently served as the program director for a classified Department of Defense system that supported operations of highest national priority.  Previously, Andrew was a Flight Test Engineer for the Air Force Test Center, where he led a team testing combat enhancements to Air Force bomber aircraft.  In this role, Andrew was also the Chief Test Director for the recent X-51A hypersonic air vehicle program and led execution for this joint DoD-NASA effort that achieved a record-breaking final flight at Mach 5.  In 2008, he deployed in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom and fielded specialized electronic jamming equipment to roadside bomb disposal teams throughout Northern Iraq, earning the Bronze Star.  Andrew received a B.S. in Astronautical Engineering from the U.S. Air Force Academy as a distinguished graduate, and earned M.S. degrees in Aerospace Engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School.  His volunteer work has included service with homeless outreach programs in the Washington, DC area, and as a mentor, math teacher and leadership seminar facilitator for inner-city middle school students with the Higher Achievement program.

Alexander Billioux, Simpsonville, SC, is an internist focused on primary care and improving health care delivery globally. He served as Assistant Chief of the Osler Medical Service at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, where he trained and mentored more than 140 internal medicine residents while treating patients in East Baltimore. He served as Co-Chair of the Department of Medicine’s High Value Care Committee, through which he led system-wide interventions to promote high value medical care. This included developing an innovative behavior change intervention aimed at reducing wasteful and potentially harmful medical practices, which the Society of Hospital Medicine recently adopted. Alex’s prior work and research has focused internationally on diseases of poverty such as HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis in India, Guatemala, Haiti, and South Africa. As an Afya Bora Fellow in Global Health Leadership, he spent a year developing a public-private partnership to improve tuberculosis diagnosis and treatment in rural Uganda, and ran a clinical trial to improve tuberculosis management at rural health centers. He is a Marshall and Goldwater Scholar who received an M.D. from Johns Hopkins University, a D.Phil. in clinical medicine from the University of Oxford, and a B.A., summa cum laude, from the Louisiana Scholars’ College at Northwestern State University of Louisiana.

Sara Bleich, Baltimore, MD, worked as an Associate Professor of Health Policy and Management at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. She was responsible for leading research teams, speaking nationally and internationally, teaching, and advising students. Sara has published more than 75 papers in top journals of public health and medicine and is widely known for her research on obesity prevention. Prior to Hopkins, Sara worked as a Research Associate at the RAND Corporation and The Measurement Group.  Sara has received several awards: “most outstanding abstract” at the International Conference on Obesity, “best research manuscript” in the journal Obesity, and first prize for “excellence in public interest communication” from the Frank Public Interest Conference. Sara is the recipient of several competitive grant awards: a Career Development Award from the National Institutes of Health and multiple Healthy Eating Research grants from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Sara is a Board Member at Garrison Forest School, an independent girls’ school. Sara volunteers for the Baltimore Education Scholarship Trust by speaking to donors to raise funds for low-income, minority students to attend independent school. Sara received a B.A. in Psychology from Columbia University and a Ph.D. in Health Policy from Harvard University.

Naomi Dennis, Houston, TX, is a Major in the United States Air Force and most recently served as Deputy Staff Judge Advocate to the Commander of the Air Force Expeditionary Center.  Having served as both a prosecutor and defense attorney, Naomi has frequently lectured on advanced trial advocacy and used her experience in sexual assault litigation to create an interactive training module for Air Force senior leaders on how to manage sexual assault allegations from trauma to trial.  During her deployment to Baghdad, her work in the Central Criminal Court of Iraq led to the successful prosecution of several high value targets.  In 2010, she was named the American Bar Association’s Outstanding Young Military Lawyer of the Year.  Naomi also co-founded Pink Isn’t Always Pretty, a 501c(3) non-profit grassroots organization promoting breast health and awareness among young women of color.  She served as PIAP’s Executive Director from 2009-2013.  Naomi received her B.A. from Howard University and her J.D. from the University of Texas School of Law where she was appointed to the National Order of Barristers.  Prior to her appointment as a Fellow, Naomi was selected to serve as a judge on the Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals.

Shereef Elnahal, Baltimore, MD, is taking a leave from residency in Radiation Oncology at Johns Hopkins Hospital. He has authored over a dozen publications on health care quality, operations management, and patient safety. Shereef co-developed a published methodology that doubled clinic efficiency in the Johns Hopkins Pancreatic Multidisciplinary Clinic, cutting patient wait times by half. As an operations consultant for Wright-Patterson Air Force Base and Pittsburgh VA hospitals, he expanded on this work to improve care access for veterans and active duty servicemembers. He was a Fellow in the Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality, and served as Chair of the House Staff Patient Safety and Quality Council at Hopkins. Shereef served on advisory boards for two firms focused on patient education and clinical operations. He also co-founded the Baltimore chapter of The Triple Helix, a 501(c)(3) non-profit that publishes an internationally-circulated journal on science in society. His civic contributions earned him the 2015 National Quality Scholar Award from the American College of Medical Quality. Shereef received a dual-degree M.D. and M.B.A. with Distinction from Harvard University, where he was President of the Harvard Longwood Muslim association. He also graduated summa cum laude with a B.A. in biophysics from Johns Hopkins University.

September Hargrove, New Orleans, LA, served as Chief Operating Officer of the PowerMoves. NOLA Initiative at the New Orleans Startup Fund, where she led a national effort to address the lack of racial diversity in tech entrepreneurship and provide access to venture capital for high-growth entrepreneurs of color. Her efforts have supported nearly 90 startups collectively raise over $17 million. In 2014, she was recognized as one of the 100 most influential people in tech and entrepreneurship throughout Louisiana. Prior to this, September was the Economic Development Policy & Program Manager for Mayor Mitch Landrieu of New Orleans, LA. Her work focused on creating an economic opportunity agenda and the development of the City’s Reentry Workforce Strategy for ex-offenders. September began her career as a gubernatorial appointee and legislative specialist in the Arnold Schwarzenegger Administration. She is an alumnus of the California Senate Fellowship and Public Policy International Affairs (PPIA) programs. September has served on the boards of the Young Leadership Council, New Orleans Women’s Shelter, New Orleans Regional Leadership Institute, and the Sacramento County Children’s Coalition. She holds a Master in Public Policy and Urban Planning from the Harvard Kennedy School of Government and B.A. from the University of California, Berkeley.

Corey Harrison, Browns Mills, NJ, was the Corporate Strategy Executive at iCIMS, a leading talent acquisition software company. At iCIMS, Corey drove the development and execution of corporate strategy and evaluated merger and acquisition opportunities. Before joining iCIMS, Corey was an Associate Director at UBS Investment Bank where he advised private equity general partners on raising institutional capital. Corey began his career in information technology and operations, first as an Analyst in the Johnson & Johnson Information Management Leadership Development Program, in which he received the highest performance rating and finished at the top of his class worldwide, and later as a Six Sigma Black Belt for AIG and the Tata Group. Concurrent with his professional and academic endeavors, Corey has held several community leadership roles and has spent fifteen years mentoring and training thousands of young professionals on leadership and entrepreneurship. Corey received an M.B.A. from Yale University, where he was awarded the Mendillo-Earle Scholarship and fellowships from the Robert Toigo Foundation, Consortium for Graduate Studies in Management, and Goldman Sachs. Corey received a B.S. in Business and Economics from Lehigh University and an M.S. in Leadership and Information Technology from Duquesne University. 

La’Shanda Holmes, Fayetteville, NC, is a Lieutenant in the U.S. Coast Guard and is the Coast Guard’s first African-American female helicopter pilot.  After growing up in the foster care system, she put herself through college, became a pilot, and amassed over 1,500 flight hours conducting search and rescue, counter drug, and law enforcement missions. She was previously stationed at Air Station Atlantic City as an Aircraft Commander and managed over 6,800 flight hours for the Coast Guard’s largest MH-65 helicopter unit.  She deployed five times to Washington, DC, as a Rotary Wing Air Intercept pilot where she supervised an 18-member team and sustained two strip alert aircraft to defend the President and the Nation’s capital in support of Operation Noble Eagle.  Her honors include the 2014 Blacks in Government award, selection as one of Grio’s Top 100 History Makers, and a nomination for an NAACP award for her work on The Smithsonian’s “Black Wings” documentary.  She is a Bonner Scholar, graduated Spelman College with a degree in psychology, and is a graduate student at Oklahoma University.  She sits on the board of directors of two non-profits that enrich youth through aviation: Tomorrow’s Aeronautical Museum and Girls Fly!

Rayden Llano, Miami, FL, was Program Director of Health Policy and Economics at LSE Enterprise, where he worked with public institutions on health policy issues and conducted healthcare research. Previously, he worked with the Clinton Health Access Initiative in Rwanda and as a consultant to the World Health Organization (WHO) in Asia, where he developed a tuberculosis and migration framework providing policy guidance to WHO member states. As a Luce Scholar at the University of Tokyo, he was the lead author of a study published in The Lancet and helped secure funding for the establishment of a global health committee within the Japanese parliament that has been chaired by two former prime ministers. Collectively, he has worked on healthcare issues in the U.S., Europe, Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and Latin America. He is an advisor to the president of the Hispanic Heritage Foundation and mentors Hispanic high school and college students. A Marshall Scholar, he received an M.P.P. from the University of Cambridge, an M.Sc. in International Health Policy and Health Economics from the London School of Economics, and a B.A. in Human Biology from Stanford University.

Jennifer Macdonald, St. Cloud, MN, is a veteran of Oper­­ation Iraqi Freedom and a Family Medicine physician at UCLA. She served 11 years in the Minnesota Army National Guard and completed a tour abroad, during which she volunteered as a medical provider in addition to her primary duties as a musician. She completed morale missions to remote bases as a keyboardist and traveled as a solo vocalist to high profile international Transition of Authority ceremonies, performing the American and Iraqi national anthems as territories of Iraq were relinquished from American back to Iraqi authority. She participated in humanitarian aid missions to benefit disabled children of Basra, Iraq, and was awarded a U.S. Army Bronze Star for her collective efforts. She is committed to care of the underserved, and toward this end, co-led a humanitarian mission to East Africa and co-founded an NGO during her undergraduate years at the College of St. Benedict, served as a class representative and free clinic volunteer during her time at the University of Minnesota Medical School, engaged in multiple patient outreach and quality initiatives with the UCLA Family Medicine Residency Program, served on the California Academy of Family Physicians Resident Council, and established a lasting connection between her institution and the West Los Angeles VA Homeless Patient Aligned Care Team. A rich family life with her husband and two young children balances her professional aspirations.

Erik Malmstrom, West Hartford, CT, was a Business Development Manager for Cargill Grain and Oilseed Supply Chain Mideast and Africa at Cargill, Inc., a leading multinational agribusiness. He was responsible for sourcing, analyzing, and managing investment opportunities across Africa, including his business unit’s largest ever acquisition of an oilseed crush plant in Zambia. Prior to Cargill, he served as an infantry officer in the U.S. Army, graduating from Army Ranger and Airborne Schools and earning the Bronze Star Medal for outstanding combat service as a rifle platoon leader in northeastern Afghanistan. Subsequently, he worked as an impact investor, strategy consultant, and independent researcher in Afghanistan, Egypt, Haiti, and other transitional economies before co-founding CrossBoundary LLC, an investment advisory firm dedicated to unlocking the power of capital to make strong returns and lasting impact in frontier markets. He has been a contributing writer to the New York Times, term member on the Council on Foreign Relations, and co-president of Harvard Alumni for Agriculture. He received a B.A. magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and a joint M.B.A. and M.P.P. from Harvard Business and Kennedy Schools, and was a Rotary Ambassadorial Scholar at Makerere University in Uganda.

Rei Onishi, Citrus Heights, CA, was a Deputy Attorney General in the California Department of Justice. He was responsible for defending the constitutionality of California’s laws, and helped craft and implement the legal strategy to defend California’s 2012 public pension reforms. He also played a leading role in developing and implementing the Department’s agenda to fight transnational organized crime, and served as an adviser to the Department’s Bureau of Children’s Justice. Before joining the Department, Rei clerked on the U.S. Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals, worked on justice sector reform in West Africa, taught in Japan through the JET Program, co-authored travel books, and was a California Senate Fellow. As President of the Buck Scholars Association, Rei co-founded the Buck Fellows Program, a mentoring and scholarship program for low-income high school students whose parents never graduated from college. He also served on the Board of Directors of Wu Yee Children’s Services and the American Constitution Society Bay Area Lawyer Chapter. He graduated Phi Beta Kappa/magna cum laude from Harvard and received his M.P.P. from the Kennedy School of Government and J.D. from Harvard Law School, where he was an editor on the Harvard Law Review and a Chayes International Public Service Fellow.

Maxeme Tuchman, Miami, FL, served as the Executive Director of Teach For America Miami-Dade and was responsible for overseeing daily regional operations for 26 staff members and cultivating $6M of private and public support in service of over 500 current teachers and alums. Prior to that, she served in Mayor Bloomberg’s bullpen managing the NYC Waterfalls, a public art installation that generated $69 million in economic activity. She also co-created the NYC Civic Corps, an AmeriCorps VISTA program that in its first three years had 448 participants hosted by 97 organizations that then were able to utilize 1.7 million new volunteers. Her commitment to educational equity began as a Teach For America corps member, teaching 480 high school students in inner-city Miami, and has led to working on educational innovation projects with organizations such as the Harlem Children’s Zone, DC Public Schools, and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.  She is a graduate of the Coro Fellowship in Public Affairs and the Miami Fellows Leadership Program. Maxeme received her B.A. from New College of Florida and holds an M.P.P. from the Harvard Kennedy School of Government and an M.B.A. from the Harvard Business School.

Kamillah Wood, Washington, DC, served as the Associate Medical Director of Mobile Health Programs at Children’s National Health System, providing comprehensive medical care to underserved children in the Anacostia region of Washington, DC.  In addition to providing direct clinical and wraparound services, she created an educational program for parents and families called the Legislative Educational Advocacy Program (LEAP), which helped to inform local community members about current policy issues, the legislative process and the importance of civic engagement. Prior to this position, Kamillah completed a fellowship in health policy and health disparities as a Mongan Commonwealth Fund Fellow in Minority Health Policy where she also obtained an M.P.H. from the Harvard University School of Public Health.  In addition to her fellowship training, Kamillah completed her pediatrics residency at The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, where she was selected to be a Chief Resident.  In this leadership role, she worked on several hospital-wide committees to address issues from emergency preparedness to implementation of an inpatient electronic health record.  She received her M.D. from George Washington University School of Medicine as a member of Alpha Omega Alpha, and graduated summa cum laude, Phi Beta Kappa from Howard University.  
