
	TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES:

	I am transmitting an alternative plan for pay increases for civilian Federal employees covered by the General Schedule and certain other pay systems in January 2016.

	Title 5, United States Code, authorizes me to implement alternative pay plans for pay increases for civilian Federal employees covered by the General Schedule and certain other pay systems if, because of "national emergency or serious economic conditions affecting the general welfare," I view the adjustments that would otherwise take effect as inappropriate.

	Civilian Federal employees have already made significant sacrifices as a result of 3-year pay freeze that ended in January 2014. In January 2014 and again in January 2015, increases for civilian Federal employees were limited to a 1.0 percent overall pay increase, an amount lower than the private sector pay increases and statutory formula for adjustments to the base General Schedule for 2014 and 2015. However, as the country's economic recovery continues, we must maintain efforts to keep our Nation on a sustainable fiscal course. This is an effort that continues to require tough choices.

	Under current law, locality pay increases averaging 28.74 percent and costing $26 billion would go into effect in January 2016. Federal agency budgets cannot sustain such increases. Accordingly, I have determined that under the authority of section 5304a of title 5, United States Code, locality-based comparability payments for the locality pay areas established by the President's Pay Agent, in the amounts set forth in the attached table, shall become effective on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2016. These rates are based on an allocation of 0.3 percent of payroll as indicated in my August 28, 2015, alternative pay plan for adjustments to the base General Schedule. These decisions will not materially affect our ability to attract and retain a well-qualified Federal workforce.

	The adjustments described above shall take effect on the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1, 2016.

	BARACK OBAMA

	THE WHITE HOUSE,
	November 30, 2015.

	Today, the White House will announce additional commitments from 73 companies from across the American economy who are joining the American Business Act on Climate Pledge. With this announcement, a total of 154 companies will have signed the American Business Act on Climate Pledge to demonstrate their support for action on climate change and the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.  These 154 companies have operations in all 50 states, employ nearly 11 million people, represent more than $4.2 trillion in annual revenue, and have a combined market capitalization of over $7 trillion.

	By signing the American Business Act on Climate pledge, these companies are:


		Voicing support for a strong Paris outcome. The pledge recognizes those countries that have already put forward climate targets, and voices support for a strong outcome in the Paris climate negotiations.

		Demonstrating an ongoing commitment to climate action. As part of this initiative, each company is announcing significant pledges to reduce their emissions, increase low-carbon investments, deploy more clean energy, and take other actions to build more sustainable businesses and tackle climate change.


	These pledges include ambitious, company-specific goals such as:


		Reducing emissions by as much as 50 percent,

		Reducing water usage by as much as 80 percent,

		Achieving zero waste-to-landfill,

		Purchasing 100 percent renewable energy, and

		Pursuing zero net deforestation in supply chains.

		Setting an example for their peers. Today’s announcements builds on the launch of the American Business Act on Climate Pledge in July, and the second round of announcements in October.


	The impacts of climate change are already being felt worldwide. Nineteen of the 20 hottest years on record occurred in the past two decades. Countries and communities around the world are already being affected by deeper, more persistent droughts, pounded by more severe weather, inundated by bigger storm surges, and imperiled by more frequent and dangerous wildfires. Rising temperatures can lead to more smog, longer allergy seasons, and an increased incidence of extreme-weather-related injuries, all of which imperil public health, particularly for vulnerable populations like children, the elderly, the sick, the poor, and some communities of color. No corner of the planet and no sector of the global economy will remain unaffected by climate change in the years ahead.

	Climate change is a global challenge that demands a global response, and President Obama is committed to leading the fight. The President’s Climate Action Plan, when fully implemented, will cut nearly 6 billion tons of carbon pollution through 2030, an amount equivalent to taking all the cars in the United States off the road for more than 4 years. The Clean Power Plan, the most significant domestic step any President has ever taken to combat climate change, will reduce emissions from the energy sector by 32% by 2030. And while the United States is leading on the international stage and the federal government is doing its part to combat climate change, hundreds of private companies, local governments, and foundations have stepped up to increase energy efficiency, boost low-carbon investing, and make solar energy more accessible to low-income Americans.

	The measures taken by the public and private sectors enabled President Obama to set an ambitious but achievable goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions economy-wide by 26-28% by 2025 last November. And in the eleven months since, we’ve seen unprecedented global momentum in the fight against climate change.

	To date, more than 180 countries representing nearly 95% of global carbon emissions have reported post-2020 climate policies to the United Nations. This includes the major economies like the U.S., China, the European Union and India and it includes a large number of smaller economies, developing nations, island states and tropical countries – some of whom are the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.

	As the world looks toward Paris, President Obama is committed to building on this momentum, with American leadership at all levels – the federal government, state and local governments and the private sector.

	*          *          *

THE AMERICAN BUSINESS ACT ON CLIMATE PLEDGE

We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment.

	The following companies have joined the pledge and their detailed commitments can be viewed at:  www.whitehouse.gov/ClimatePledge

21ST CENTURY FOX

	21st Century Fox is committed to minimizing our environmental impacts, growing sustainably, and inspiring others to take action. Since 2006, we have carefully measured and managed our impacts through our company-wide sustainability program and continue to drive industry-leading sustainability practices in film and television production. We work to raise awareness among audiences through pioneering content like Cosmos, Avatar, Breakthrough, Rio, and National Geographic. In the next 5 years, we pledge to:


		Reduce carbon emissions by 25% compared to 2013, normalized by revenue.

		Reduce carbon emissions from Fox feature film productions by 15% per shoot day.

		Achieve zero waste to landfill at Fox Studios in Los Angeles.

		Implement a sustainable lumber use policy for all Fox feature film and scripted television production.

		Disclose our energy use and greenhouse gas emissions annually. We have reported this data through CDP since 2006, and we have been recognized on the S&P500 Disclosure Leadership Index for seven consecutive years for the thoroughness and transparency of our reporting.

		Continue to invest in clean and renewable sources of energy. Since 2010, we have invested more than $30M in on-site renewable energy and installed 5.5MW of new solar power.

		Continue to improve the efficiency of our studio operations, including through programs like the U.S. Department of Energy’s Commercial Buildings Partnership, which has helped us reduce our carbon footprint by over 1000 tons and save 2.6 million kWh per year in energy use.


365 RETAIL MARKETS  

	At 365 Retail Markets, we are committed to environmentally friendly business practices for a more sustainable future. As part of our 2015 initiatives, we redesigned our facilities using energy efficient technologies and reducing energy consumption while accommodating for a growing workforce.

	As part of our continued efforts, we pledge to:


		Improve energy efficiency across all our offices and facilities by 20% by 2025.

		Commit to purchasing 25% renewable energy for the operation of our offices, warehouses and other facilities by 2025.

		Design and develop future products, services and technologies with improved energy efficiency and lower carbon emissions.

		Commit to provide preferred contractual terms to partners, suppliers and customers who honor a similar Climate Pledge.

		Develop long-term business plans, budgets and facilities improvements aligned with our Climate Pledge and our commitment for energy efficiency.


ABENGOA BIOENERGY US

	Since 2005 Abengoa Bioenergy has produced more than 2.5 billion gallons of renewable ethanol fuel in the US, displacing 2.5 billion gallons of petroleum based transportation fuel and reducing GHG emissions from those gallons by an average of 34%.  Building on this commitment to GHG reductions, Abengoa Bioenergy pledges to:


		Require our contractors and suppliers to calculate and report their GHG emissions in order to accurately and affirmatively achieve further incremental emissions reductions in the supply chain.

		Continue to improve energy efficiencies and emissions controls in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 10%, compared to a 2005 baseline, by 2025.

		Continue the startup and full scale operation of our newly constructed commercial scale cellulosic ethanol facility in Hugoton, KS, producing up to 25 million gallons per year of extremely low carbon fuel, reducing GHG emissions by approximately 90% compared to petroleum fuels.

		Complete development of new technologies and promote joint investment with third parties in further cellulosic ethanol production facilities utilizing a broad range of feedstocks, including municipal waste, as well as agricultural residues.

		Develop long-term business plans that align with the deep decarbonization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C.


ACER AMERICA

	We put forth our pledges as follows:

	Building on our success achieving a reduction of global greenhouse gas emissions by 30%, compared to a 2009 baseline, by 2015, Acer America Corporation pledges to:


		Reduce global greenhouse gas emissions by 60%, compared to a 2009 baseline, by 2020.

		Continue to purchase 100% green power for our United States operations and increase the renewable energy purchased for our international operations.


ADOBE

	Adobe takes a holistic approach to conserving resources, taking into account our employees & operations, customers & products, and the communities where we live and work. Our guiding principles are: create healthy and innovative work environments; enable our customers to become more sustainable through the use of our products; reduce operational costs and increase productivity through resource conservation and waste reduction; and provide opportunities for employees to get involved in environmental efforts at home and in the community.

	Adobe is committed to five ambitious goals that will help contribute to a low-carbon, sustainable future:


		Energy: 70% of Adobe’s global workplaces are LEED certified. In the past five years we’ve dramatically lowered our energy consumption and emissions, achieving carbon neutrality in 2013 with minimal use of renewable energy credits. That said, we have a more aggressive long-term goal of operating on 100% renewable energy by 2035.  

		Water: Universal access to clean water is more threatened than ever, and several of our largest sites are vulnerable to prolonged droughts due to climate change. Since 2010, we’ve reduced water consumption by more than 60 percent, and will continue to drive conservation across the company.

		Waste: Adobe diverts more than 97% of its waste from major sites in North America. We apply these best practices to our other locations around the world to minimize waste and divert what is left away from landfill.

		Collaboration: We work openly with other companies, communities and non-governmental organizations to share and adopt sustainability best practices

		Products:  We are a leader in developing software (and digital delivery of software) that helps our company and our customers consume fewer natural resources. Even with 30+ years of innovation in this space, we know we’ve just scratched the surface.


AEMETIS

	Aemetis is planning to expand our technology platform and grow into new markets to combat climate change by significantly reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by displacing petroleum based fuels.

	Having met our 2006 pledge to deploy 100 MGY of low carbon biofuels by 2015, Aemetis further pledges to:


		Deploy over 400 MGY of ultra-low carbon fuel by 2025 with greater than 50% reduction of GHG, compared to gasoline.

		Invest approximately $800 million in new infrastructure for production of ultra-low carbon fuel by 2025.

		Utilize the lowest carbon intensity feedstocks, including agricultural residue and MSW, for the production of renewable jet, diesel, and gasoline replacing fuels.


AGILE SOURCING PARTNERS

	Agile Sourcing Partners, Inc. is committed to helping our planet and minimizing our impact on the environment. With that commitment, we will be ISO 14001 compliant in 2016 and we are investing in technology that will reduce our paper consumption 75% by 2017. In addition, we are leveraging technology to maximize the productivity time of employees and minimize their use of fossil fuels to commute to work. Finally, we are committed to helping our utility customers identify and procure equipment and technology and deliver it in the most efficient manner to minimize their impact on the environment.

AIRBNB

	Airbnb pledges to:


		Increase the energy conservation on our already sustainable travel platform. In 2014 Airbnb released an independent study that found that home sharing is a more sustainable way of travel, in comparison to staying in traditional accommodations, with significantly less energy and water use, greenhouse gas emissions, and waste generation.

		Continue to find new ways to encourage our hosts and guests to conserve more energy. Earlier this year, Airbnb partnered with Tesla to install charging stations at a number of current Airbnb listings. This week, Airbnb has announced a partnership with NRG Home Solar, that will provide incentives to existing and new members of the Airbnb community to further increase the savings from going solar, and travel credits to encourage individuals to experience this more environmentally sustainable method of travel.


AKAMAI

	Leading the Internet Revolution for more than 15 years, Akamai is proud to take a leadership role in minimizing the environmental impact of information technology systems.  Our sustainability initiative strives to measure and mitigate the impact of our business operations and maximize the business benefits of our sustainable practices.  We are committed to providing services that help our customers leverage the Internet and improve their own environmental sustainability practices.   

	Since 2009 Akamai is committed to:


		Annually reducing our energy and carbon intensity relative to network traffic by 30%.

		Recycling 100% of our decommissioned electronic equipment using only e-Stewards certified facilities.


ALCOA

	Building on our existing global commitment to reduce GHG intensity by 30% by 2020 (vs. 2005 baseline), Alcoa pledges to:


		Reduce absolute GHG emissions by 50% in the U.S. (vs. 2005 baseline) by 2025,

		Deploy our full range of innovations to develop materials, products and technologies that move us toward a low carbon sustainable future, and

		By 2025, demonstrate a net reduction of GHG emissions from the use of our products equal to three times the emissions created by their production.


ALL STAR SERVICES

	All Star Services recognizes that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, thus we have done the following to combat climate change. We put forth our pledges as follows:

	All Star Services pledges to:


		To reduce vending route truck emissions by 20% by the year 2025 by using energy efficient vehicles.

		Using sustainable packaging for packing and repacking.

		Improve energy efficiency across 20,000 square feet of company property by at least 20%, through motion sensors on lights.

		To increase the company's rate of recycling to 20% by the year 2017


AMAZON

	Amazon is obsessed with our customers and committed to providing the products and services they want while further reducing the impact on our planet. At Amazon, we are committed to sourcing clean, renewable electricity for our facilities globally and measuring and materially reducing our energy usage and carbon footprint. Amazon Web Services has a long-term commitment to achieve 100% renewable energy usage for our global infrastructure footprint. By the end of 2016, we intend to reach 40%. Amazon is also working with several collaborative organizations such as the EICC and the Renewable Energy Buyers’ Principles to learn, share and further our own work.

AMD

	Founded more than 45 years ago in Silicon Valley, Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) designs and integrates technology that powers millions of intelligent devices, including personal computers, game consoles, and cloud servers that define the new era of immersive computing.  And for 20 years AMD has annually reported sustainability goals and progress on climate protection. 

	We recently exceeded our five year environmental goals (2009-2014), achieving 24 percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from our non-manufacturing sites, and 31 percent reduction in global energy use. During this time we procured enough renewable energy (from wind turbines) to power 100,000 homes for a year, while also reducing transportation-related emissions by 32 percent.

	As we become a semiconductor design firm without manufacturing assets, AMD’s climate protection goals are focused on our supply chain manufacturing and the energy efficiency of our products. Therefore, AMD’s goals to accomplish by year 2020 include:


		Increase the typical use energy efficiency of AMD’s processors for mobile products by 25 times (from a 2014 baseline).

		Demonstrate the wafer foundries used by AMD collectively outperform the annual US semiconductor industry average greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent or more for the relative year.


AMERICAN EXPRESS

	American Express has taken measurable actions to reduce its carbon footprint, optimize the efficiency and sustainability of its workplace, and support its customers in reducing their environmental footprints. Currently, 100% of the electricity used to power American Express headquarters and 55% of the electricity used to power all the company’s U.S. operations is carbon-free, utilizing a mix of wind, biogas, biomass and solar energy. On-site green power generation and the purchase of renewable energy credits (RECs) helped American Express reduce its carbon emissions by 27.5% between 2007 and 2012.

	Building on this achievement, American Express pledges to:


		Reduce absolute GHG emissions by 10% globally (vs. 2011 baseline) by 2016.


AMERICAN HONDA MOTOR COMPANY, INC.

	American Honda Motor Company, Inc. is contributing to Honda Motor Company’s goal of reducing its total company CO2 emissions by 50 percent by 2050 compared to its 2000 baseline.

	Similarly, we have set the goal of reducing the CO2 intensity of our automobiles, motorcycles and power equipment products worldwide by 30 percent by the year 2020 compared to its 2000 baseline.

	To meet these global goals, American Honda Motor Company, Inc. is making significant efforts in areas including use of renewable energies, zero-waste-to-landfill facilities and reducing energy usage throughout all of its operations.

	Detailed information on all of Honda’s environmental efforts can be found in the 2015 HMC Global Sustainability Report and Honda North American Environmental Report.

APPLE

	Apple, already running all of its U.S. operations on 100% renewable energy, will bring an estimated 280 megawatts of clean power generation online by the end of 2016 through investments in Arizona, California, Nevada, North Carolina, Oregon and Sichuan Province, China. Since 2011, Apple has reduced carbon emissions from its global corporate facilities, data centers and retail stores by 48%.

AT&T

	By 2020 our goal is to:


		Reduce our direct greenhouse emissions (Scope 1) by 20 percent as compared to our 2008 baseline; and

		Reduce the electricity consumption of our company relative to data growth on our network by 60 percent as compared to our 2013 baseline.


AUTODESK

	Building on Autodesk’s long-term commitment to support and equip designers and engineers to help solve climate change while meeting our own science-based greenhouse gas reduction target, we pledge to: 


		Power our business and growing cloud services with 100% renewable electricity by 2020 as part of our continuing science-based greenhouse gas reduction commitment

		Provide new software and services to help cities and enterprises design, operate, and make the triple bottom line business cases for sustainable buildings, water, and transportation projects.

		Invest in people, start-ups and organizations who are designing climate solutions.  We invest dollars, software, and pro bono hours. 

		Prioritize education for designers, students and makers to design within the limits of the planet and to address the epic challenge of climate.  

		Continue to advocate for climate action in the IT industry, across the many industries we serve, and in the regions where we do business.


AVERY DENNISON

	Building on a 2009 pledge to reduce GHG emissions, indexed to net sales, by 15% from 2005 to 2015, Avery Dennison pledges to:


		Reduce absolute greenhouse gas emissions from our operations by at least 3% annually, and by at least 26 % overall, between 2015 and 2025.

		Eliminate deforestation from the production of agricultural commodities by 2020, in alignment with the 2014 New York Declaration on Forests.

		Purchase 100% of our paper from certified sources by 2025.

		Purchase 70% of our paper from FSC certified sources by 2025.

		Develop long-term business plans that align with the deep decarbonization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C.


BANK OF AMERICA

	Since 2007, Bank of America has provided more than $39 billion in financing for low-carbon activities to help address climate change. Bank of America pledges to:


		Increase our current environmental business initiative from $50 billion to $125 billion by 2025 through lending, investing, capital raising, advisory services and developing financing solutions for clients around the world.

		Attract a wider array of capital to clean energy investments by developing innovative financing structures – from reducing investment risk though our Catalytic Finance Initiative to engaging individual investors through our Socially Responsible Investing platform to building new markets for green bonds, yield-cos and other vehicles.


BEN & JERRY’S

	We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	Ben & Jerry’s has worked hard over the years to be good environmental stewards. We’ve invested in efficiency at our manufacturing facilities, worked with our family farmers to reduce on farm emissions, and have recently invested in on site renewable energy generation at our Vermont and Netherlands manufacturing plants. 

	We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment.  We put forth our pledges as follows:

	At Ben & Jerry’s, we recognize that urgent is action required to avoid the worst impacts from climate change. That’s why we’ve recommitted our company in 2015 to a refreshed and even more aggressive set of science based climate and energy goals. Ben & Jerry’s pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions, per unit of production, by 40%, compared to a 2014 baseline, by 2025

		Transition to 100% clean and renewable energy by 2025, with a mix of both onsite and offsite sources.

		To peak absolute emissions in 2026, despite aggressive growth projections.

		Increase investments in building climate-resiliency in our supply chain $10 million by 2025.

		Develop long-term business strategies to achieve our science based mid-century goal in line keeping global average temperatures rise below 2ºC.


BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY ENERGY

	Berkshire Hathaway pledges to:


		Build on our investment of more than $15 billion in renewable energy generation under construction and in operation through 2014 by investing up to an additional $15 billion.

		Pursue construction of an additional 552 megawatts of new wind generation in Iowa, increasing MidAmerican Energy Company’s generating portfolio to more than 4,000 megawatts of wind which is comparable to 57 percent of its retail energy load in 2017. MidAmerican Energy Company is the nation’s largest owner of wind generation among regulated, investor-owned utilities.

		Retire more than 75 percent of our coal-fueled generating capacity in Nevada by 2019.

		Add more than 1,000 megawatts of incremental solar and wind capacity through long-term power purchase agreements to PacifiCorp’s owned 1,030 megawatts of wind generating capacity. PacifiCorp is the nation’s second largest owner of wind generation among regulated, investor-owned utilities. This incremental renewable generation, expected to be online by the end of 2017, would bring PacifiCorp’s non-carbon generating capacity to more than 4,500 megawatts which equates to approximately 22 percent of PacifiCorp’s retail energy load in 2017. 

		Invest in transmission infrastructure in the West and Midwest to support the integration of renewable energy onto the grid.

		Support and advance the development of markets in the West to optimize the electric grid, lower costs, enhance reliability and more effectively integrate renewable resources.


BEST BUY

	Best Buy is committed to positively impacting our planet and our communities by reducing our impact on the environment, broadening consumer access to energy-efficient solutions, and supporting sustainable product life cycle management.

	Best Buy pledges to:


		Reduce our carbon emissions by 45% by 2020 (2009 baseline), derived from operational reductions and renewable sourcing. This science-based goal builds on our 2014 achievement of a 26% reduction in carbon emissions within our operations (2009 baseline).

		Provide an assortment of energy-efficient products and solutions to enable consumers to minimize their own carbon footprint. In 2014, we helped our customers prevent 900 million pounds of carbon emissions through the ENERGY STAR® certified products they purchased from Best Buy.

		Collaborate with industry partners to promote sustainable electronics through manufacture, transport, in-use phase and end-of-life treatment of products.


BHP BILLITON 

	We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in

	Paris that takes a strong step toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	We recognize that delaying action on climate change will have significant economic and human costs. Accelerating the transition to a lower-carbon economy can contribute multiple benefits including sustainable economic growth, improved public health, reduced physical impacts of climate change and less damage to the environment. We put forth our pledges as follows:


		Require our Businesses to identify, evaluate and implement suitable GHG reduction opportunities, including during project design and equipment selection.

		In FY2015, our Businesses implemented projects that delivered almost 680,000 tonnes of annualized GHG emission reductions.

		Build on our continuing commitment to limit or reduce GHG emissions, such as our current target of limiting our FY2017 emissions below our FY2006 emissions baseline. This target encourages us to look for ways to improve energy efficiency, increase productivity and implement additional emission reduction projects across the Company as we grow.

		Transparent reporting of performance.

		Build resilience to the physical impacts of climate change, which is vital for the long term sustainable growth of the Company. We take a multifaceted approach to climate change adaptation, building the climate resilience of BHP Billiton’s operations, investments, communities and ecosystems.

		Contribute to community and ecosystem resilience.
		

				In May 2015, BHP Billiton and the Great Barrier Reef Foundation announced a new $7 million partnership to support critical marine research and rehabilitation works at remote Raine Island, located off the Cape York Peninsula, Australia. Raine Island is the world’s largest green turtle rookery and home to a major Coral Sea seabird nesting population.



		Invest in alternative energy and emission reduction technology development and deployment.
		

				We have invested over US$400 million in research, development and deployment of low-emissions technologies (LET) since 2007. We now focus on technologies that have the potential to lead to material emissions reductions but are currently not available at commercial scale or acceptable cost, including carbon capture and storage (CCS), technologies to reduce fugitive emissions from coal and petroleum operations, battery storage, high efficiency/ low-emissions (HELE) power generation and transportation.



		Invest in critical technology and data information sharing to accelerate the development and deployment of CCS.
		

				BHP Billiton and SaskPower recently announced a partnership to accelerate the development of CCS by enhancing global access to the data, information and lessons learned from the Boundary Dam project and associated test facilities.



		Work with governments, industry bodies, peer companies and other stakeholders to inform the development of long-term policy frameworks that deliver a measured transition to a lower-emissions economy. BHP Billiton will advocate for an effective policy framework that includes a price on carbon, support for low-emissions technologies and energy efficiency, and measures to build resilience.

		Share our experience and expertise with stakeholders to identify solutions that can drive emissions reductions at the lowest cost.


BIOAMBER

	Our mission is to be a fast growing producer of bio-based materials made from renewable resources instead of fossil fuels, offering competitively priced, sustainable chemicals that have the cleanest environmental footprint in the industry.

	We put forth our pledges as follows:


		Provide industry with succinic acid manufactured by a process that reduces GHG emissions by over 95% and energy consumption by over 60% relative to the conventional petrochemical manufacturing process.

		Build and operate and additional 160,000 tons of renewable chemical manufacturing capacity by 2020 that cuts GHG emissions by 60% and energy consumption by 50% relative to the conventional petrochemical manufacturing process, reducing CO2 equivalent gases by over 650,000 tons per year.

		Reduce energy intensity at our existing 30,000 ton capacity manufacturing plant by 5% each year, achieving a 25% reduction by 2020.


BIOGEN

	Biogen is proud to stand with other leading companies to support the American Business Act on Climate Pledge. This initiative is another demonstration of our ongoing commitment to corporate citizenship: improving the lives of patients, rethinking the way we use natural resources, developing and empowering our employees, and bettering the community.

	Biogen pledges to:


		Maintain its Net Zero Carbon Footprint. As of the end of 2014, Biogen became the first biopharmaceutical company to achieve carbon neutrality.

		Reduce our direct and indirect operational carbon emissions by 80 percent by 2020 compared to 2006, normalized by revenue.

		Reduce our water use by 80 percent by 2020 compared to 2006, normalized by revenue.

		Achieve zero manufacturing waste-to-landfill status at all major owned locations.


BLOOMBERG

	Bloomberg recognizes that carbon emissions have global environmental, social and economic implications.  And we are committed to addressing them through a combination of actions:  reducing consumption, buying renewable products and services, helping to set standards, encouraging disclosure and promoting clean technologies.

	As an information provider for banks, corporations, governments and others, Bloomberg is leveraging its data, news and analytics capabilities to help our customers identify, manage and seize sustainability and climate-related risks and opportunities.


		Reduce absolute emissions 20% by 2020 vs our 2007 baseline

		Improve Energy Efficiency 50% by 2020 vs our 2007 baseline

		Source 35% direct clean energy sources by 2020

		Generate a 20% or greater IRR on the investments described above


BMW NA
	By 2020, the BMW Group will be the leading automobile manufacturer in the use of renewable energy in production and value creation.

	Sustainability management at the BMW Group spans all steps of the value chain and all organizational units of the BMW Group in the United States.

BMW Group, North America

	Through 2017, the BMW Group will have invested $2.7 million in a public private partnership with the Department of Energy’s Argonne National Laboratory to significantly improve the performance of Li-Ion batteries for electric vehicles (EVs). The aim of this investment is to accelerate mass market adoption of zero-emissions vehicles. This partnership brings the BMW Group’s total investment with U.S. government agencies, universities, and start-ups to nearly $10 million over the last 3 years alone to advance EV battery technology.

BMW Technology Office, California

	The BMW Technology Office in California will continue to achieve 100% net zero energy using solar panels and repurposed EV batteries to capture and store energy, respectively. This system accommodates not only building load, but also EV charging stations for the public and employees.

BMW Manufacturing Co., South Carolina

	BMW Manufacturing will continue to source nearly 50% of the energy required to power the facility from otherwise unused methane gas, reducing the plant’s CO2 emissions by 92,000 tons per year.

	BMW Manufacturing will continue to service the plant’s production and logistics functions with nearly 350 hydrogen fuel cell-powered material handling vehicles.

	BMW Manufacturing will continue to be zero waste-to-landfill, with the exception of waste water treatment.

SGL Automotive Carbon Fibers, Washington State

	SGL Automotive Carbon Fibers (SGL) in Washington State, a BMW Group-SGL joint venture, will continue to use 100% renewable hydroelectric power to produce carbon fiber which is used in every EV made by BMW.


		By 2020, SGL will achieve zero waste-to-landfill.

		By 2020, SGL will lower air emissions by up to 20%.

		By 2020, SGL will reduce the environmental impact of chemicals used on site.

		By 2025, SGL will reduce water usage by as much as 30%.

		By 2025, SGL will reduce power consumption by at least 10%.


BMW North America Headquarters, New Jersey

	BMW North America will continue to power the four major buildings on its New Jersey campus with up to 30% renewable solar panel energy.

BMW Group, Global

	The BMW Group will continue to optimize transport volumes and increase the share of low-emissions modes of transport and capacity utilization in new vehicle transport.

	By 2020, the BMW Group will have reduced energy consumption per vehicle produced by 45% compared to 2006.

	The share of renewable energy was increased as a percentage of total electricity sourced by the BMW Group to 51% in 2014 and this progress will continue. The target of the BMW Group is to source 100% of electricity from renewable sources.

	The BMW Group commits to the long-term goal of employing a 100% CO2-free heat supply.

	By 2020, the BMW Group will have reduced water consumption (including process wastewater) by 45% per vehicle produced compared to 2006.

	BMW Group vehicles will continue to be 95% recyclable.

	By 2020, the BMW Group will have reduced Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) emissions per vehicle produced by 45% compared to 2006.

BNY MELLON

	BNY Mellon strives for the highest standards of environmental performance across our operations by focusing on activities that enable us to operate effectively, while considering financial and environmental responsibility. As global citizens invested in a sustainable future, we take our commitment seriously to reduce our output of harmful greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, seek ways to invest in the renewables market and enable others to do so through our investment capabilities.

	For the past three years, we have been rated as the top performing financial institution in the world in CDP’s climate change program. Since the inception of our GHG program in 2008, we have reduced our scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions by 32 percent, excluding data centers. Over the past five years, we have also offset an average of 63 percent of our global electricity consumption through the purchase of renewable energy, on-site solar generation, and renewable energy credits.

	Building on this successful track record, BNY Mellon pledges to:


		Reduce global scope 1 and scope 2 GHG emissions by 40 percent by 2020, compared to our 2008 baseline

		Pursue carbon neutrality for all scope 1 and scope 2 emissions, as well as scope 3 business travel emissions

		Enable mainstream investor capital to advance sustainable development by supporting social finance’s growth through development of products, solutions, research and thought leadership

		Commit to continued leadership in disclosure and performance around climate change related topics


BURNS & MCDONNELL

	 Building on our commitment to sustainability, Burns & McDonnell pledges to:


		Reduce energy usage (electricity and natural gas) by 20% at our world headquarters facility.

		Reduce water usage by 50% at our world headquarters facility.

		Promote sustainability certifications for our engineering and construction professionals, including GBCI LEED and ISI Envision Sustainability Professionals (ENV SP).

		Maintain LEED Silver certification at our world headquarters facility and continue EPA Energy Star benchmarking to monitor and improve performance.

		Implement sustainable upgrades to our world headquarters facilities. Past facility upgrades have included rooftop gardens, solar lighting and photovoltaics, and stormwater retention basins.

		Identify available source reduction and recycling options in order to minimize overall waste in our design-build projects. We help our clients divert material from landfills through our national material reuse coordination and sourcing services.

		Help our clients, including many companies also participating in the Climate Pledge, develop corporate policies, quantify emissions and develop strategic plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

		Provide comprehensive solutions to our clients by offering a broad range of sustainability services: air quality, energy use and optimization, environmental restoration, renewable energy, sustainability reporting, sustainable design-build, waste management, water management, and wetlands and ecosystems.


CA TECHNOLOGIES

	CA Technologies pledges to:


		Reduce global greenhouse gas emissions by 35%, compared to a 2006 baseline, by 2020.


CALPINE

	Calpine is a leading independent power producer and we have long invested in clean, low-carbon and renewable energy resources.  We own and operate the nation’s largest modern fleet of low-carbon, highly efficient, combined-cycle natural gas-fueled power plants; we also are the nation’s largest operator of combined heat and power (CHP) plants; and we own the nation’s largest fleet of renewable geothermal power plants. 

	Calpine has been a longtime supporter of efforts to mitigate GHG emissions from the power sector.  We have also voluntarily taken steps to assure that we provide reliable, low-cost electricity in an environmentally responsible and sustainable manner. 

	Calpine pledges to:


		Continue in our efforts to support market based solutions aimed at lowering carbon emissions in the power sector.

		Explore investments in low carbon technologies, such as efficient natural gas turbines, renewables and battery storage, which complement our existing clean and efficient gas powered and geothermal fleet.

		Work with states where we operate to help develop the most effective Implementation Plans for compliance with the Clean Power Plan that take into account each states unique standing while achieving the common goal of reducing system wide GHG emissions over time.


CAMPOS BROTHERS FARMS

	Since 2009, Campos Brothers Farms has been actively focused on reducing our greenhouse gas emissions, as well as reducing our impact on a variety of environmental stewardship fronts, realizing a reduction of 19.7 Million pounds of CO2 from being released into the atmosphere.  Additionally, we have taken aggressive steps to reduce our water usage by 33%, have reduced our waste by 20% through recycling, orchard pruning management, and full utilization of all three products an almond produce; the hull (for livestock feed), the kernel/nut (one of the most nutritious foods in the world), and the shell (for livestock bedding). In addition, we have partnered with ‘Project Apis m’ to fund and direct research to enhance the health and vitality of honey bee colonies while improving plant production.

	Despite our progress, we recognize that more can be done that will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable growth. Building on our progress since 2009 to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, water use, waste and increase recycling in our operations, Campos Brothers Farms pledges to:


		Reduce the amount of CO2 being released into the atmosphere by an additional 166.4 Million pounds by 2025.

		Reduce our waste by another 25% through additional efficiencies and directive to utilize shells and orchard prunings for co-generation.

		Through increasing our solar power utilization by 400%, purchase of additional electric equipment/vehicles we will move from being nearly carbon neutral, to becoming carbon negative with respect to greenhouse gases.

		Reduce dust into the atmosphere by 60% by 2025

		Improve our company-wide recycling rate to 95% by 2025 up from our 2009 baseline of 75%

		Reduce water usage by at least an additional 10% through technology, soil and tree improving on our baseline of 33% reduction in 2009 by converting to micro/drip irrigation.

		Invest in additional research funding for Project Apis M to enhance the health and vitality of honey bee colonies.

		Participate in a new USDA-funded pilot project between the Almond Board of California and the Environmental Defense Fund  and others designed to give both almond and corn growers greater access to greenhouse gas markets like those under California’s cap-and-trade program


CANTALOUPE SYSTEMS

	We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment. We put forth our pledges as follows:

	Since 2008, Cantaloupe Systems has successfully removed 1,021 vending trucks off the road in collaboration with our vending operators. This has resulted in reducing our carbon emissions by 58.9 million lbs. annually.

	Building on this momentum, Cantaloupe Systems pledges to:


		Remove an additional 1,539 vending trucks off the road, which will stop 88 million pounds of carbon dioxide from being emitted annually by 2025

		Improve energy efficiency across 11,000 square feet of company property by at least 20% by 2025.


CANTEEN & COMPASS GROUP

	For more than a decade Compass Group has strived to make positive change within the realm of sustainability by supporting local economies, sourcing sustainable seafood, implementing measures to address climate change issues and much more. Our sustainability story has established Compass as an important contributor towards a more sustainable future and as a model for what is possible within the realm of the food service industry.

	Compass Group North America pledges to reduce our CO2e emissions by 43%, equating to more than 2,000,000 metric tons, against our 2010 baseline by 2025.

	Our foodservice companies will promote these changes through engineering our menus to create a more sustainable food supply, promoting responsible production and waste practices and conscious product sourcing and purchasing. Canteen, our vending division, will work to reduce CO2e emissions through the use of more energy-efficient equipment, upgrading its fleet, use of a fleet GPS program and more efficient route scheduling.

CARGILL

	Cargill established comprehensive goals around climate, energy, and water 10 years ago. We have improved energy efficiency by 16 percent, carbon intensity by 9 percent, and freshwater efficiency by 12 percent since setting energy goals in 2000 and climate and water goals in 2005. We continue to raise the bar and have set new goals through 2020.

	From our 2015 baseline, Cargill pledges to over the next five years:


		Improve greenhouse gas (GHG) intensity by 5 percent.

		Improve freshwater efficiency by 5 percent.

		Improve energy efficiency by 5 percent.

		Increase renewable energy to 18 percent of our total energy use, up from 14 percent.


	Cargill is a signatory to the United Nations’ New York Declaration on Forests, committed to doing its part to cut natural forest loss in half by 2020, and strive to end it by 2030.

	Cargill continues to work with customers and civil society to build sustainable supply chains that address climate concerns. We also partner with farmers and ranchers to help agriculture adapt to a changing climate. Our focus areas address sensitive needs in the critical supply chains of palm, soy and beef.


		Palm: Cargill is building a traceable and transparent palm oil supply chain firmly committed to no deforestation of high conservation value (HCV) lands or high carbon stock (HCS) area; no development on peat, and no exploitation of rights of indigenous peoples and local communities.

		Soy: Cargill has played a critical role in stemming the spread of deforestation in the Amazon by working with industry and NGO partners to develop and implement the Brazilian Soy Moratorium, a voluntary zero-deforestation agreement that contributed to a dramatic drop in deforestation in the region.

		Beef: A founding member of the Global Roundtable for Sustainable Beef (GRSB) and the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Beef (USRSB), Cargill is committed to conserving, reducing and more efficiently managing resources, and mitigating greenhouse gas emissions.


CH2M

	Climate change is driving changes in infrastructure worldwide; among other effects, it challenges CH2M’s clients with too little water in some places, too much water in other places, and the need to adapt to changing weather patterns. While helping communities adapt through climate risk and resilience services and natural capital solutions, we also set a science-based internal climate action goal to do our part in mitigating climate impacts. We pledge to:


		Reduce our carbon footprint 25 percent by 2017 for carbon emissions from fuel and electricity.

		Embed sustainability into infrastructure through robust engagement with the Institute for Sustainable Infrastructure Envision™ rating system, the Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design (LEED™) rating system, Greenroads™ and other third-party systems that demonstrate proven performance in energy efficiency.

		Work with clients and collaborators like The Nature Conservancy to advance green and natural infrastructure solutions or hybrid engineering designs that use less energy to maintain, could offer carbon sequestration benefits, and offer better resiliency against climate change.

		Partner with nonprofit organizations, like Water For People, to bring clean, safe drinking water and sanitation to developing communities and support sustainable access to water through resilient systems.


CISCO SYSTEMS, INC.

	Cisco is taking long-term actions to reduce our contributions to climate change through improvements to our products and our operations, and through the actions of our suppliers. Currently, we have committed to the following energy and GHG emissions reduction goals:


		Reduce total Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions worldwide by 40 percent on an absolute basis by FY17 compared to an FY07 baseline

		Reduce total business-air-travel Scope 3 GHG emissions worldwide by 40 percent on an absolute basis by FY17 compared to an FY07 baseline

		Reduce Cisco’s FY17 electricity emission factor to half of the International Energy Agency world average emission factor

		Reduce total operational energy use per unit of revenue worldwide by 15 percent by FY17 compared to an FY07 baseline

		Use electricity generated from renewable sources for at least 25 percent of our electricity every year through FY17

		Cisco commits to announcing 2020 goals within the next 12 months


COCA-COLA 

	Coca-Cola pledges to reduce the carbon footprint of “the drink in your hand” by 25% by 2020.

	Across the Coca-Cola system (our company and more than 250 bottling partners globally), we intend to make significant, comprehensive changes, investments and technology advancements to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions by 25 percent by 2020 as our business continues to grow. We estimate that achieving this ambitious goal will prevent approximately 20 million metric tons of carbon emissions annually by 2020. That’s four times the Coca-Cola system’s annual carbon emissions from manufacturing.

	This goal is comprehensive and extends across our entire value chain - ingredient sourcing, manufacturing processes, packaging formats, delivery fleet, and refrigeration equipment.

COX 

	Cox Enterprises has long been committed to environmental stewardship and conservation.  Since 2007, the company has invested more than $100 million in sustainability and conservation through its Cox Conserves program, which promotes and supports positive environmental change in our businesses and in the community. 

	Looking ahead, Cox Enterprises aims to send Zero Waste to Landfills by 2024 and become both Carbon and Water neutral by 2044. 

	We pledge to accomplish these goals by:


		Carbon Reduction through alternative energy, energy conservation and operating a more sustainable fleet.

		Water Conservation programs across our campuses and business operations that reduce our water footprint and balance necessary use with meaningful restoration.

		Waste Diversion driven by increased recycling, exploring new waste technologies, as well as employee and customer engagement.

		Renewable Energy investments in new energy generation technologies as well as existing, proven technologies.

		Sustainable Supply Chain partnership with suppliers, with a focus on conservation including reduction in energy and water used in manufacturing and distribution, reduction in air and water pollution and waste products, use of recycled content in products and packaging, investments in alternative energy sources, and prioritization of environmental friendly transportation.


CRAIG COMMUNICATIONS INC.

	Craig Communications pledges to reduce our carbon footprint by 25% in the next year through an action plan that includes:


		Telecommuting to work

		Buying an electric vehicle

		Promoting public transportation

		Promoting ride sharing

		Reduce, Recycle, Reuse Program

		Paper-free office environment

		Energy Star® appliances

		Removing copy machines

		Energy Star® computer equipment


DANFOSS

	Danfoss engineers technologies that enable the world of tomorrow to do more with less. We meet the growing need for infrastructure, food supply, energy efficiency and climate-friendly solutions.

	Danfoss is committed to a creating a sustainable energy future. Our proven technologies are used around the world to help reduce energy use and carbon emissions in intensive and critical processes, such as cooling our buildings, preserving our food supply, industrial manufacturing processes, and delivering clean, potable water. We are also active in the field of renewable energy as well as district heating infrastructure for cities and urban communities. These solutions enable our customers to reduce their energy footprint with a strong return on investment. Danfoss has taken significant measures to help reduce the impact of our own buildings and operations, and, since 2007, we have decreased our energy use by 30%.

	To further build on these long-term and ongoing efforts, Danfoss pledges to continue our focus on improving the energy efficiency in our buildings and manufacturing processes and increase our utilization of low-carbon energy resources in order to, by 2030:


		Reduce by 50% the energy intensity in our buildings and processes as compared to 2007

		Reduce by 50% the CO2 intensity in consumed energy as compared to 2007


	We also remain committed to investing in the manufacture of new products that use low-GWP refrigerants and that will allow others to reduce their carbon emissions.

DELL

	At Dell, we believe technology has an important role to play in both mitigating and adapting to climate change. While we will continue to focus on better understanding and managing our carbon footprint, we see our most important role as a provider of technology that will drive research, innovation and meaningful action. With this in mind, Dell puts forth the following pledges for action by 2020 that will reduce our footprint and help our customers to reduce theirs.

	Dell pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions from our facilities and logistics operations by 50 percent by 2020, compared to our 2012 baseline.

		Increase purchases of renewable energy to at least 50 percent of our total by 2020.

		Reduce the energy intensity of our product portfolio by 80 percent by 2020, compared to our 2011 baseline.

		Implement zero-waste packaging across our product offerings by 2020, sourcing all packaging materials from sustainable/renewable sources and ensuring all packaging materials are recyclable or compostable.

		Plant 1 million trees by 2020 (beginning 2008) to help sequester carbon and restore habitats.

		Incorporate 50 million pounds of recycled-content plastics and other sustainable materials into our products by 2020 (beginning 2013) as part of our transition to a more circular economy. Dell has already used more than 21 million pounds of recycled-content plastics in our products, including 4 million pounds of closed-loop recycled plastics recovered through Dell’s world-class electronics take back programs.


	Dell is also committed to demonstrating how technology solutions can create net positive effects – enabling customers to achieve social and environmental benefits that exceed the footprint of the technology used to deliver them. By 2020, we will demonstrate this net positive effect is 10 times greater than the footprint of the technology used to achieve it.

	We encourage others to join us in setting meaningful targets, taking action, and supporting global cooperation to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases and address climate change.

DISNEY

	Disney has a long-term goal of zero net greenhouse gas emissions. 


		By 2020, Disney will reduce net emissions by 50% from 2012 levels by following the hierarchy of avoiding emissions, reducing emissions through efficiencies, replacing high-carbon fuels with low-carbon alternatives, and then using certified offsets for our remaining emissions. 

		Disney has also put an internal price on carbon, which has helped inspire innovation within the company, helped integrate the consideration of carbon emissions into decision-making, and resulted in the protection or rehabilitation of over 156,000 acres of forests.

		As of 2014, Disney has decreased net emissions by 31% from 2012 levels.


DSM NORTH AMERICA

	DSM is a global life science and material science company working to create brighter lives for people today and generations to come. DSM is a world leader in sustainable nutrition, materials and health.  It delivers innovative solutions that nourish, protect and improve performance in global markets such as food and dietary supplements, personal care, feed, pharmaceuticals, medical devices, automotive, paints, electrical and electronics, life protection, alternative energy and bio-based materials.  DSM has 22,000 employees world-wide and is headquartered in Heerlen, the Netherlands. The United States is DSM’s biggest country by sales and shareholder base, with approximately 4,000 employees and 35 sites.

	DSM has been in continuous operations for more than 100 years. “Dutch State Mines” or DSM, originally a coal mining company has transformed itself through acquisition and divestiture into a global leader in moving to a low carbon, circular economy rebranding the DSM acronym to mean “Do Something Meaningful.”

	This has translated into a continuous effort to reduce DSM’s carbon footprint and create more sustainably products in the United States and globally, and to work with developing nations to ensure that they have the tools to be a contributor to the world economy. 

	DSM is unique as a publicly traded company as it ties DSM executives’ compensation to sustainability goals.  Specifically, up to 50% of DSM’s variable executive compensation is tied to achievement of sustainability goals.  DSM also engages in integrated annual reporting, which includes its financial results alongside its sustainability results.

	DSM is engaged in an ongoing partnership with Department of Energy to reduce energy consumption by 20%; it made a $200 million foreign direct investment in a commercial scale cellulosic biofuels plant in Emmetsburg, Iowa; DSM created a 6 MW solar field project that  produces approximately 30-40% of its Belvidere, NJ manufacturing plant’s electricity needs at peak production and offsets CO2 emissions from the grid by more than 4,563 Metric Tons annually; it is engaged in innovative research to reduce carbon exemplified by DSM’s Clean Cow initiative that will reduce bovine methane emissions by up to 30%; and  DSM participates in long-standing efforts to reduce global hunger and malnutrition, including its partnership with the United Nations World Food Programme, Partners in Foods Solutions, USAID, Global Health Corp, World Vision and others.

	DSM makes the following pledges:


		DSM will move all operations, on 6 continents, to 100% renewable energy. DSM will move to 50% renewable energy by 2025.

		DSM will maintain an internal Carbon Price of €50/ton

		DSM will reduce its Green House Gas Emissions by at least 25% by 2020

		DSM will improve its energy efficiency by 20% by 2020

		DSM will continue to tie Executive Compensation to meeting sustainability targets.


DUPONT

	Taking the next step in our 25-year long sustainability journey and continuing our focus on addressing the challenge of global climate change, DuPont has announced 2020 Sustainability Goals that address three areas: 1) Innovation, 2) Operational Footprint, and 3) Food Security.

Sustainable Innovation Goal:


		Further embed sustainability in our innovation process and challenge all products in our pipeline to contribute to a safer, healthier, more sustainable world.  We will track our progress and measure and report the quantifiable safety, health, and sustainability benefits from major growth innovations.


	This Sustainable Innovation Goal will help shape the portfolio of products and solutions that DuPont will commercialize in the years to come.  Delivering products and solutions that help enable improved energy efficiency and/or reduced greenhouse gas emissions will continue to be a priority.  For instance, DuPont recently opened a cellulosic biofuel facility in Nevada, Iowa. This biorefinery is the world’s largest cellulosic ethanol plant, with the capacity to produce 30 million gallons per year of clean fuel that offers a 90 percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions as compared to gasoline. To further scale production of cellulosic ethanol globally, DuPont will license the technology, deploying hundreds of millions of gallons of cellulosic ethanol by 2025. 

	Between 2007-2014, the use of DuPont products in renewable energy, automotive light weighting, and many other applications enabled greenhouse gas reductions of 32 million metric tons CO2-e. In 2014, $2.6 billion of DuPont’s annual revenue was from products that create energy efficiency and/or significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Operational Footprint Goals: 

	The following 2020 Sustainability Goals continue and renew our focus on reducing our operational footprint in the areas of energy consumption, greenhouse gas emissions, waste, and water use:


		We will reduce our non-renewable energy use by 10% per price-adjusted dollar revenue, compared to a baseline of 2010.

		We will further reduce our greenhouse gas emissions intensity by 7% from a 2015 baseline.

		Each DuPont business will meet a 2020 waste goal appropriate to its operations.

		All DuPont sites in locations evaluated as high or extremely high water-risk will establish water risk mitigation plans and complete priority implementation objectives by 2020.


Food Security Goals:


		We committed $10 billion to research and development, and the introduction of 4,000 new products by the end of 2020. The work centers are developing innovations that will produce more food, enhance nutritional value, improve agriculture sustainability, boost food safety, extend food freshness, and reduce waste.

		By the end of 2020, we will facilitate 2 million engagements with young people around the world to transfer the knowledge of sustainable food and agriculture and the impact it will have on a growing population.

		We will work to improve the livelihoods of at least 3 million farmers and their rural communities through targeted collaborations and investments that strengthen agricultural systems and make food more available, nutritious and culturally appropriate. This is in addition to the work we are already doing to enhance the lives of hundreds of millions of farmers through our normal business practices.


EDP RENEWABLES NORTH AMERICA 

	EDP Renewables (EDPR) is a leading company in renewable energy, producing clean and green energy and committed to climate action with defined targets contributing to the improvement of the existing climate challenges. EDPR manages a global portfolio of 9.5 GW of capacity installed in 10 countries. EDPR North America is the United States platform which develops, constructs, and operates more than 4,000 MW of wind energy in 12 states.

	EDPR has set a 2014-17 growth target of +2 GW (>500 MW/year) in clean projects, where the U.S. represents 60% of EDPR growth, estimating an increase in CO2 avoided of +7%. Even though our activity is based on clean energy generation, we are conscious about promoting a culture of rational use of resources. We are committed to maintain our indirect emissions representing less than 1% of the total amount of emissions avoided. Additionally, EDPR is keen on promoting innovation in our operation phase; in order to increase assets’ efficiency, a €10 million investment target has been set for these purposes.

	In 2014, EDPR generated electricity essentially from carbon-free and renewable sources (71%) and has committed to increase its renewable installed capacity to exceed 75% of its total capacity mix by 2020. Over the next 15 years, the company aims to reduce CO2 emissions by 75% compared to 2005 levels. In this sense, EDPR North America pledges to align with EDP Group commitments and drive economies where EDP Group operates in the successful low carbon growth path. To aim these commitments, EDPR North America plans to:


		Build another 1,500 MW of new wind generation in the United States between 2014 and 2017 and have more renewable projects ready to develop throughout the country.

		Keep utilizing the data generated and best practices learned at its facilities to maximize clean power generation from existing facilities as well as to improve future renewable installations and meet its goal of achieving greenhouse gas reduction.

		Support the implementation of the Clean Power Plan by working with national, regional, state and other stakeholders to ensure its effective implementation.

		Work with Utility, Commercial and industrial companies to provide traditional and innovative renewable products that meet their commercial needs.

		Attract a wider array of capital to clean energy investments by developing and promoting innovative investment structures.

		Work with policy makers and regulators to support and advance the development of markets to optimize the electric grid, lower costs to consumers, enhance reliability and more effectively integrate renewable resources.

		Commit to integrate relevant stakeholders’ initiatives that may strongly contribute to and support the achievement of the above goals.


EMC CORPORATION

	In support of our goal to achieve 80% absolute reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 in accordance with the 2007 Bali Climate Declaration, EMC Corporation pledges to:


		Realize a 40 percent absolute reduction of global Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions below 2010 levels by 2020

		Obtain at least 20 percent of global grid electricity needs from renewable sources by 2020

		Have all hardware and software products achieve increased efficiency in each subsequent version by 2020

		Reduce energy intensity of storage products 60 percent at a given raw capacity and 80 percent for computational tasks from 2013 to 2020


ENEL GREEN POWER NORTH AMERICA, INC.

	Enel Green Power North America, Inc. (EGP-NA), part of Enel Group, is a leading owner and operator of renewable energy projects with over 90 renewable plants located in 21 U.S. States and two Canadian provinces. These wind, solar, hydropower, and geothermal plants total more than 2,000 MW of installed capacity.

	As one of the leading integrated global operators in the gas and electricity sectors present in more than 30 countries, the Enel Group oversees power generation from a net installed capacity of over 89.5 GW, transmission and distribution of electricity and gas through a network of over 1.16 million miles, and delivery of energy to more than 61 million customers.

	The Enel Group is fully committed to continuing and accelerating the de-carbonization path that it has undertaken. Over 47 percent of the power generated by Enel globally in 2014 was carbon free and by 2019 the company is expected to have more than 50 percent of its generation mix come from clean sources, adding at least nine GW* of new renewable capacity globally during that period. Enel Group is additionally committed to cutting its CO2 emission intensity worldwide by 25 percent by 2020 compared to 2007 levels and to achieving carbon neutrality before 2050.

	As part of Enel’s global commitments and as part of the American Business Act on Climate Pledge, EGP-NA commits to:


		Deploy close to 1,500 MW of new renewable capacity in North America by 2019.

		Capture new sustainable resources, increase the reliability and resiliency of existing renewable energy technologies, and bring down the overall cost of building and operating low-carbon resources.  These efforts will include but not be limited to:
		

				Support development of future hybrid renewable energy facilities driving from lessons learned at the Stillwater geothermal-solar photovoltaic-solar concentrating thermal triple hybrid plant in Fallon, Nevada and other facilities.

				Improve energy storage technology by developing commercial applications across the value chain, from generator to end-customer.

				Foster technology development partnerships between EGP-NA, the Department of Energy, and emerging clean tech entrepreneurs to identify, develop, and deploy promising low-carbon energy technologies.

				Capture emerging energy resources in areas such as marine energy and high-altitude wind.




	* Of which 0.9 GW subject to the positive finalization of EGP integration into Enel Group.

ENER-G RUDOX

	ENER-G Rudox, Inc. pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 25%, compared to a 2005 baseline, by 2025

		Improve energy efficiency across all company properties by at least 20% by 2025

		Increase investment in low-carbon, climate-resilient, and/or green projects by 50% by 2025

		Develop both short and long-term business plans that emphasize sustainability

		Proactively support the massive global effort needed to keep mitigate global warming


ENERGY OPTIMIZERS

	Energy Optimizers, USA pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 100%, compared to a 2005 baseline, by 2017

		Deploy 100% of our energy needs utilizing renewable energy by 2017 by utilizing solar, hydrogen and fuel cells

		Improve energy efficiency across 2,134 square feet of our company property by at least 45% by 2017

		Eliminate deforestation from the production of agricultural commodities by 2020, in alignment with the 2014 New York Declaration on Forests

		Develop long-term business plans that align with the deep de-carbonization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C


EQUINIX

	At Equinix we believe it is important that companies operate in an environmentally sustainable way. For us, electric power is our largest source of greenhouse gas emissions. As such, earlier this year, we announced a long-term commitment to use 100 percent clean and renewable energy across our global platform. Our efforts will result in carbon-neutral data center and interconnection services for our customers and partners around the globe. Already 100 percent in Europe and 43 percent globally, we are increasing our use of renewable energy to power our data centers through solar and wind power purchase agreements and onsite generation. In the U.S. we recently contracted for 330 MW of wind and solar. Taken together, these represent the largest power purchase agreements (PPAs) ever undertaken by a data center provider. Equinix is also deploying onsite renewable energy and investigating other ways to increase its contribution to its renewable goals. We are currently installing a 1 MW fuel cell at our San Jose data center in Silicon Valley and have solar panels installed in our data centers in Amsterdam and Singapore.

	To demonstrate our commitment to reducing our impact on global climate change, we pledge to:


		Continue our efforts towards operating our portfolio of Data Centers using 100% Clean and Renewable energy;

		Be transparent in our reporting of our environmental impacts through respected agencies;         

		Design, build, and operate efficiently in order to reduce our consumption of all resources, including electricity, water, natural gas, diesel, and refrigerants;

		Increase our investment in upgrades, retrofits, and replacements of old or inefficient equipment to enable demand savings and additional reductions in our carbon footprint;

		Build to a minimum of USGBC LEED Silver Standards (or regional equivalents) globally (23 currently);

		Track our performance using U.S. Energy Star for Data Centers (or regional equivalents) and strive for facility certification (6 U.S. recertifications for 2015 currently);

		Play an active role in the greening of our industry by promoting the use of innovative, clean and renewable technologies through collaboration and advocacy with our customers, peers, utility providers, and other interested parties.


FACEBOOK 

	Facebook pledges to:


		We are committed to powering our operations with 100% clean and renewable energy.

		In 2012, we set ourselves the goal of having 25% of our energy in 2015 come from clean and renewable sources. We are on target to exceed that goal.

		We have doubled our previous target, setting a new goal of having 50% of our energy in 2018 come from clean and renewable sources

		We have designed and built some of the world's most energy- and water-efficient data centers - and will continue to invest in innovation in our infrastructure aimed at improving their efficiency even further.

		We have open-sourced our hardware and data center designs, and will continue to collaborate openly to drive efficiency improvements across the industry.

		We are working actively with dozens of other companies to scale up corporate purchases of renewable energy - sharing best practices and collaborating on policy changes to increase the options available so that more companies can buy more renewable energy.

		We believe in being open and transparent about our environmental performance. We have disclosed facility-level detail on our carbon and energy footprint for the last 4 years, and starting this year are including details on our water footprint. We also have public real-time dashboards for our data centers letting everyone see how efficiently they are operating.

		Access to clean and renewable energy is a key criterion in our site selection process for new data centers.


FRHAM SAFETY PRODUCTS, INC. 

	Frham has been partnering with Pacific Gas and Electric Company as well as Arizona Public Service Company to pioneer a Low Emissions Carbon Footprint and Total Cost of Ownership Program for many years. Frham provides nuclear power plants with a proprietary product line that is used as radiation protection garments and related items. A Life Cycle Analysis has demonstrated these products to be the lowest carbon footprint among related personal protective equipment for commercial nuclear plants and U.S. Department of Energy facilities.

	Frham pledges several future goals and commitments:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 50% over the next five years.

		Reduce water usage by 60% in all processing facilities by 2020.

		Reduce waste to landfills by 75% by 2020.

		Utilize 10% of renewable energy in all facilities by 2018.

		Reduce paper usage by 75% by 2020.

		We are committed to getting declarations for all of our items/products that reduce greenhouse gases by 2020. We have already performed and documented a Life Cycle Analysis on 40% of our products. We intend on having these declarations for all products by 2020.


FULCRUM BIOENERGY

	Fulcrum BioEnergy, Inc., a leader in the development of low carbon drop-in transportation fuels from municipal solid waste, hereby pledges to:


		Develop and construct projects that will produce more than 300 million gallons per year of jet fuel, diesel and bio-crude by 2025;

		Produce low carbon fuels that reduce GHG emissions on a lifecycle basis by more than 80% compared to petroleum-based fuels; and,

		Produce these drop-in fuels from municipal waste streams that would otherwise be landfilled and don’t compete with food supplies.


GAMESA

	Gamesa anticipates that it will supply up to 10GW of new wind turbines, globally, between 2015 and 2017. Gamesa actively supports policy initiatives, in the United States and worldwide, that promote clean energy technology and reduce carbon emissions. Furthermore, Gamesa is proud to offer the following commitments as part of its continuous global efforts to reduce its impact on the environment:


		A targeted reduction of CO2 emissions from its manufacturing operations of 15% by 2025, through technology and efficiency improvements.

		Maintain and enforce its ISO 14001 (Management Systems), ISO 14006 (Ecodesign), and ISO 14064 (Greenhouse Gas Emissions) certifications in worldwide Gamesa production centers.

		An investment target of more than €125 million in low carbon technology research through 2017.

		Sourcing at least 20% of the electricity supply for Gamesa’s worldwide operations from clean energy technologies by 2025.


GE

	Since its 2005 launch, Ecomagination – GE’s commitment to accelerate the development of technology solutions that save money and reduce environmental impact for its customers and own operations – has invested $15 billion in R&D and generated more than $200B in revenue. GE’s operations have seen a 31 percent reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions since 2004 and a 42 percent reduction in freshwater use since 2006, realizing more than $300M in savings.


		Last year, Ecomagination extended its commitments to 2020 with new goals: to invest an additional $10B in cleaner technology research and development; and to further reduce GHG emissions and freshwater use of GE operations by 20 percent from the 2011 baseline which aligns the company with the global goal of keeping warming to less than 2 degrees C.

		GE Ecomagination believes companies can be a positive force for change while also delivering for investors. Ecomagination has achieved both. As one of GE’s most successful business initiatives, Ecomagination brings strong returns for shareholders and improved cost and emissions savings for our customers.


GENENTECH

	At Genentech, we apply the same science-based approach to environmental sustainability that we do to creating medicines for people with serious diseases.

	We know that when it comes to making a meaningful impact on the environment, success doesn't happen overnight. It’s the everyday strides we make in reducing our impact on the environment - whether it’s the type of lighting we’ve installed in our newest buildings, the innovative technologies we’re testing, or how we equip our employees to be green at home--that all contribute to a meaningful impact on the resources we use and the spaces where we work.

	At our South San Francisco headquarters, we’re actively working toward a low carbon future. By 2020, we pledge to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions from our on-site energy use by 30 percent compared to 2010. We plan to achieve this goal through a combination of energy efficiency investments and increased use of renewable electricity.

		Reduce greenhouse emissions from transportation, including our sales fleet, employee air travel and commuting, by 10 percent compared to 2010.

		Reduce overall water use by 20 percent compared to 2010. We plan to accomplish this goal through projects such as internal treatment and reuse of wastewater streams in our cooling towers and boilers, as well as the implementation of a greywater reuse system.

		Reduce waste sent to landfill by at least 80 percent compared to 2010 through a variety of initiatives including food waste reduction, expanded compost collection and lab plastic recycling.


GENERAL MILLS

	General Mills has long been committed to being part of the solution on climate change. Since 2005, we have reduced our absolute greenhouse gas emissions by 13 percent within our direct operations.  Now, we are furthering our commitment by announcing a goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions across our entire value chain – from farm to fork to landfill – over the next 10 years.

	Our goal, developed using science-based methodology, is an ambitious one. We pledge to:


		A [-28%] absolute reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2025, using a 2010 baseline. 

		Our long term aspiration is to achieve sustainable emission levels in line with scientific consensus by 2050. 


	In addition to mitigation, we recognize the importance of adaptation in building resilience. For this reason, we commit to supporting climate adaptation programs for key regions, particularly in key commodities. 

	General Mills has also made other significant commitments in the area of sustainable agriculture:


		We will sustainably source 100% of our top 10 ingredients by 2020.  These ingredients include vanilla, cocoa, palm oil, fiber packaging, sugar cane, wheat, oats, dairy and dry milled corn. Together, they represent 50% of our total ingredient buy.

		Eliminate deforestation from the production of agricultural commodities by 2020, in alignment with the 2014 New York Declaration on Forests


	Finally, we realize that this level of ambition cannot be realized by one company alone.  For this reason, we are signatories to UNGC, BICEP, We Mean Business, the New York Declaration on Forests and Climate Counts. 

	We believe that by advancing our commitment now, we have an opportunity to encourage others to do the same, establish new partnerships, and together, make real progress towards more sustainable emission levels for our planet and future generations.

GENERAL MOTORS

	General Motors pledges to:


		Reduce energy intensity from facilities 20 percent by 2020 over a 2010 baseline.

		Promote use of 125 megawatts of renewable energy by 2020 over a 2010 baseline.

		Reduce carbon intensity from facilities 20 percent by 2020 over a 2010 baseline.

		Reduce water intensity 15 percent by 2020 over a 2010 baseline.

		Reduce total waste 40 percent by 2020 over a 2010 baseline.

		Achieve 150 landfill-free facilities by 2020 and set an aspirational goal to have all manufacturing sites send zero waste to landfill.

		Maximize vehicle efficiencies and reduce carbon emissions around the globe while meeting a variety of customer needs.

		Help make electrified vehicles become more mainstream.

		Collaborate with others and proactively look for sustainability opportunities that collectively drive economic, environmental and social improvements.


GOLDMAN SACHS

	Goldman Sachs has had a long standing commitment to harness markets and deploy capital to scale-up clean energy technologies and facilitate the transition to a low carbon energy future.  In 2012, we established a ten year goal to finance and invest $40 billion in clean energy globally.  Less than four years into that goal, we have already mobilized $37 billion of capital for solar, wind, smart grid and other clean technologies.  We expect to achieve the full goal next year and are expanding our existing target to $150 billion in capital deployment for the clean energy sector by 2025.

	We will also harness financial mechanisms to help our clients strengthen their physical resiliency and more effectively manage risks relating to weather extremes.  Since 2006, we have structured over $14 billion of weather-related catastrophe bonds.  As part of our continuing efforts in providing risk management solutions, we will facilitate new models that can evaluate the financial benefits of increased investments in physical resiliency.

	Recognizing the importance of reducing our own carbon footprint, we pledge to achieve carbon neutrality across our operations and business travel in 2015 and maintain it thereafter.   We will also aim to use 100% renewable power to meet our global electricity needs by 2020.  Finally, by 2020 we will strive to reduce absolute energy use across our occupied operationally-controlled facilities by at least 10% from a 2013 baseline.

GOOGLE

	Google pledges to:


		Renewable energy: Google is committed to powering our operations with 100% renewable energy. We have purchased 1.1 gigawatts of renewable energy to power our data centers, and we commit to tripling our purchases of renewable energy by 2025. We believe that by directly investing in renewable energy projects, we can help accelerate the shift to zero-carbon power and create a better future for everyone. We commit to continuing our $2 billion/2.5 gigawatts cumulative investments in transformative global clean energy projects, including major investments by 2025 in emerging markets, where there is both great need and great potential.

		Transportation: Google shuttles and corporate electric vehicles result in net annual savings of 29,000+ metric tons of CO2, equivalent to taking 5,700 cars off the road or avoiding 87M vehicle miles every year. In our Bay Area headquarters we commit to reducing single occupancy vehicle commuting to 36%, a 10% reduction from today, by transitioning our employees to shuttles, carpool, public transit, biking, and walking.

		Water Usage: Google is committed to reducing our water consumption, particularly in the drought-ridden Western United States, through the use of recycled water irrigation, drought tolerant plants, less turf grass, fixture replacements and employee awareness efforts. After exceeding our 20% energy, water and waste reduction goals in 2014 associated with the California Best Buildings Challenge, we are now targeting a 30% reduction in potable water use by our Bay Area headquarters in 2015 from our 2013 baseline.

		Products and Platforms: Google’s products help drive carbon mitigation efforts and inform climate science. Our Google Earth Engine geospatial analysis platform makes more than 40 years of satellite imagery available online so scientists and researchers can analyze real-time changes to the Earth’s surface. Through the Climate Data Initiative, we provided one petabyte of cloud storage for data and climate/weather models, plus 50 million hours of high-performance cloud computing. We commit to continuing to develop products and platforms that can help reduce emissions and bring the power of cloud computing to climate science.


GOURMET COFFEE SERVICE

	We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment. We put forth our pledges as follows:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20%, compared to a [2005] baseline, by [2025]

		Improve energy efficiency across 20,000 square feet of company property by at least 20% by [2025] by using more efficient lighting and HVAC systems.

		Increase use of energy efficient vehicles, reducing our fuel consumption by 20% to 40%.

		Increase use of technology to eliminate unnecessary route visits - cutting our fuel consumption by 25%.

		Develop long-term business plans that align with the deep decarburization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C.

		Promote the use carbon filter systems to replace bottled water and reverse osmosis, both of which promote significant water waste.


GREENWOOD ENERGY

	Greenwood Energy is the America’s energy business of the Libra Group and we have a substantial pipeline of distributed solar projects across the United States and Latin America. We are passionate about America’s renewable energy future and have committed our resources and team to empowering our customers and securing a low-carbon energy future. Since 2006, Greenwood has developed over 95 megawatts (MW) of renewable energy projects in the US, reducing carbon emissions by an estimated 85,000 metric tons per year, the equivalent CO2 emissions from nearly 46,000 tons of coal.

	In support of the American Business Act on Climate, Greenwood pledges to:


		By the end of 2016, develop and construct over 100MW of incremental solar photovoltaic (PV) capacity for commercial and industrial (C&I) customers throughout the US, reducing carbon emissions by approximately 90,000 metric tons per year.

		By the end of 2017, develop and construct over 200MW of distributed generation renewable energy projects for C&I customers across Latin America.

		Support the deployment of distributed solar PV and energy storage technologies with C&I companies across the U.S. and Americas, creating the most efficient delivery of electricity with the lowest carbon footprint – as little as 2,000 to 3,000 projects (40 – 60 projects per US State) can avoid a gigawatt of traditional generation and transmission.

		Expand Greenwood’s business model to encompass and integrate other clean energy technologies such as building energy efficiency and demand management.


HERSHEY’S

	Since 2009, the Hershey Company has been actively focused on reducing our greenhouse gas emissions and our impact on climate change, as well as reducing our impact on a variety of environmental stewardship fronts, realizing a 23% reduction in GHG emissions from operations during that time.  Additionally, we have taken aggressive steps to source 100% RSPO sustainable palm oil. We have also initiated a partnership with The Forest Trust to trace our palm oil purchases and ensure our suppliers are not developing on peat areas and are identifying and reducing greenhouse gas emissions in their operations, two key factors that impact climate change. Finally, we have also partnered with Wildlife Works to purchase carbon credits to offset the unavoidable emissions from our sales and corporate fleet of vehicles. 

	Building on our 2014 pledge to deploy further actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, water use, waste and increase recycling in our operations by 2017, The Hershey Company pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by 2025, compared to a 2009 baseline, augmenting the 23% reduction we have already achieved

		Trace 100% of our palm oil purchases to the mill level by 2015 and to the plantation level by 2016, ensuring the palm we purchase is deforestation-free and grown and processed sustainably, in alignment with the 2014 New York Declaration on Forests

		Expand the utilization of electric vehicles in our corporate fleet, and continue to purchase carbon credits to offset unavoidable emissions in our sales and corporate fleet of vehicles while concurrently reducing these emissions

		Achieve zero waste to landfill status at all Hershey facilities by 2025, building on our existing roster of 11 zero waste to landfill facilities

		Save, an additional 25 million pounds of packaging material by 2025, augmenting the 16 million pounds we have already saved since 2009

		Improve our company-wide recycling rate to 95% by 2025, up from our 2009 baseline of 72%

		Reduce absolute water use by an additional 25% by 2025, building on our existing progress of reducing water use by 70% since 2009


HP

	HP Living Progress is our framework for thinking about how we do business. It’s the way we integrate sustainability into our business strategy, building on a commitment we articulated in our company objectives in 1957 and have reaffirmed every year since.

	With a rapidly growing global population and finite resources, “business as usual” is no longer an option. Through HP Living Progress, we make the environment stronger as we grow by improving the efficiency of our supply chain, operations, and products and solutions, as well as by making community investments that help tackle sustainability challenges. To this end, HP pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20%, compared to a 2010 baseline, by 2020

		Purchase 115 MW of renewable energy by 2020

		By 2020: Decrease first-tier manufacturing and product transportation-related GHG emissions intensity in our supply chain by 20% compared with 2010.

		By 2020: Reduce the emissions intensity of our product portfolio** by 40% compared to 2010 levels.  

		Reduce fresh water consumption (per employee) at HP office sites 20% by FY2020 compared to FY2010 baseline

		Explore long-term business plans that align with the deep de-carbonization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C.


IBERDROLA USA

	With more than 6,000 megawatts (MW) of renewable electricity generation, 8,344 miles of electric transmission lines, 18,952 miles of natural gas distribution lines and 67,430 miles of electric distribution lines, and 67.5 billion cubic feet (Bcf) of natural gas storage, Iberdrola USA’s energy businesses are contributing to America’s clean, affordable and energy independent future. 

	Iberdrola USA has invested billions of dollars in electricity distribution and transmission networks, renewable electricity generation, natural gas distribution networks, natural gas storage facilities, and smart grid technologies in the United States.

	Iberdrola USA is a subsidiary of Iberdrola S.A. an international energy company that is the largest wind energy generator in the world and a leader in the battle against climate change. The company’s emissions per kilowatt-hour (kWh) are already 30% lower than the average of the European electricity sector and significantly lower than the U.S. average. Iberdrola S.A. recently committed to globally reducing the company’s overall greenhouse gas emissions intensity by 50% in 2030 compared to 2007 levels and to become carbon neutral by 2050.

	As part of Iberdrola USA’s continued commitment to reducing our carbon footprint in the United States, setting targets to reduce emissions, raising public awareness of the consequences of climate change and incorporating climate risk management into our business plans, Iberdrola USA pledges to:


		Align with Iberdrola S.A.’s commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the United States and achieve Iberdrola S.A’.s carbon intensity and carbon neutrality objectives.

		Add to our more than 6000 MW of renewable electric generation capacity in the United States. Iberdrola USA has identified and commits to build at least another 446MW of new wind generation in the United States. With the appropriate market conditions and regulatory environment, Iberdrola USA stands ready to develop additional wind and solar projects throughout the country.

		Pursue investments in transmission infrastructure in New England and New York to support the integration of renewable energy onto the grid, including providing better access to the New England grid for renewable resources in western and northern Maine and adjacent Canadian provinces, and providing enhanced transmission capacity between renewable resources in New York’s upstate counties and the New York metropolitan area.

		Improve resilience and reliability of energy infrastructure to extreme weather and climate change impacts through increased use of technology and automation, operations and maintenance procedures, and focused capital investments. Partner with the Department of Energy through the Partnership for Energy Sector Climate Resilience to develop and pursue strategies to reduce climate and weather-related vulnerabilities. Utilize the Department of Energy’s Value of Service model to develop a cost benefit and prioritization model for system hardening investments.

		Support the continued development and interconnection of new customer-owned generation sources which now total nearly 5,000 small-scale customer-owned facilities feeding into our existing grid.

		Introduce new grid technology to provide faster, lower cost integration for renewable energy resources up to 2 megawatts.

		Commit at least 5 percent of annual fleet acquisition dollars to plug-in electric technologies and, through the Iberdrola Foundation promote third-party PV charging station installations through grants to businesses, non-profits, and municipal governments in communities served by our electric utilities.

		Maintain ISO 14001:2004 certification for environmental leadership in project engineering and management, to develop and maintain the grid serving the region’s renewable energy resources at the highest environmental standards.


IBM

	IBM has been a global leader regarding energy efficiency and the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions for decades. For example:


		Between 1990 and 2014 IBM saved 6.8 million megawatt hours of electricity consumption, avoided 4.2 million metric tons of CO2 emissions, and saved $550 million through energy conservation actions.

		We have deployed new I/T solutions developed by IBM for managing the energy efficiency of buildings and data centers. These solutions have typically driven 10% reductions in energy consumption for the systems they monitor.

		In 2014 we used 683,000 megawatt hours of renewable electricity, representing 14.2% of IBM's global electricity consumption and a 17.9% increase from 2013.

		We have already reduced IBM's operational CO2 emissions over 25% against a 2005 baseline.


	We put forth our pledges as follows:


		Reduce CO2 emissions associated with IBM’s energy consumption 35% by year-end 2020 against base year 2005 adjusted for acquisitions and divestitures.

		Procure electricity from renewable sources for 20% of IBM's annual electricity consumption by 2020.

		Achieve annual energy conservation savings equal to 3.5% of IBM's total energy use.


IHG

	As one of the world's leading hotel companies, we understand the impact our business activities have on the environment and take active steps to manage it.

	Although our ambition is to grow, we want to do this responsibly, always mindful of the resources we use as well as the opportunity we have to do things differently. Our stakeholders, and not least our colleagues and our guests, want us to demonstrate how seriously we take issues such as climate change, water scarcity and environmental degradation. We work closely with them to control the impact we have on the world around us.

	IHG pledges to:


		Reduce our carbon footprint per occupied room by 12% by 2017 off a 2012 baseline.

		Reduce our water use per occupied room in water stressed areas by 12% by 2017 off a 2012 baseline.


IKEA USA

	At IKEA, sustainability is central to our business. Because climate change is one of the biggest challenges facing society, IKEA Group and IKEA Foundation this year made bold new commitments totaling 1 billion in funding to accelerate the transition to a low-carbon economy and support the communities most at risk. In June, the IKEA Group committed 600 million for investment in renewable energy, building on the 1.5 billion invested in wind and solar energy since 2009. In addition, the IKEA Foundation has committed 400 million of funding to support the communities most impacted by climate change.

	Looking forward, we put forth our additional pledges as follows:

	IKEA pledges to:


		Produce as much renewable energy as the total energy we consume in our global operations by 2020. This is already the case in the US, where the IKEA Group’s wind farm in Hoopeston, IL is on target to produce 165% of the electricity and 130% of the energy equivalent to that consumed by IKEA US operations. In addition, the IKEA solar presence in the US consists of 42 solar projects across nearly 90% of IKEA US locations.

		Become 30% more energy efficient in our own operations by August 2020, compared to FY10.

		Reduce carbon emissions from the transport of goods by 30% by 2020 (in relative terms) compared with FY12, for example by reducing the number of shipments through improving our ordering process, equipment, packaging, and net cubic meters of transported goods per shipment, and by increasing the use of rail, barge, and sea rather than road transport.

		Encourage and enable our direct suppliers to become 20% more energy efficient by August 2017, compared to FY12 (defined as total energy consumed/m3 of goods).

		Take the lead in developing and promoting products and solutions that inspire and enable people to live a more sustainable life at home, and achieve more than a fourfold increase in sales of those products and solutions by August 2020, compared to FY13.

		By August 2020, we will contribute to FSC certification of another 10 million hectares of forest in priority areas – which is equivalent to more than double the total area needed to supply IKEA. This is in addition to 35 million hectares of FSC forest already added through our earlier partnership projects.

		By August 2020, we aim to source 100% of our wood, paper and cardboard from more sustainable sources (currently defined as FSC certified or recycled wood).

		By August 2020, 90% of the waste from our own operations will be recycled or energy recovered, of which 80% of the waste from stores and distribution centers and 90% from IKEA Industry Group will be material recycled.


INGERSOLL RAND

	Ingersoll Rand, a world leader in creating comfortable, sustainable and efficient environments, is committed to addressing the unsustainable global demand for energy resources and its impact on the environment for our employees, customers and shareholders.

	Ingersoll Rand pledges to:


		Reduce emissions from our products and our operations by over 20 MMT (metric tons) CO2e by 2020 and expect to cut 50 MMT CO2e by 2030.

		Invest $500 million in product-related research and development over the next five years to fund the long-term reduction of GHG emissions without compromising energy efficiency or safety.


INTEL

	Over 20 years ago, Intel established public environmental goals to reduce its environmental footprint, including greenhouse gas emissions.  Since 2000, we have reduced our absolute greenhouse gas emissions nearly 40% and our emission intensity by approximately 60%.  That substantial progress has been accomplished in part due to aggressive efforts to reduce our emissions of fluorinated gases, a critical component in semiconductor manufacturing.  We have installed 20 on-site renewable energy projects to date and will purchase over 3 billion kW-hrs of green power this year, making Intel the largest purchaser in the US for the 7th consecutive year.

	To further build on these efforts we pledge to accomplish the following by 2020:


		Continue 100% green power in our US operations and increase renewable energy use for our international operations

		Grow the installation and use of on-site renewable energy to triple our current levels

		Building upon our 60% reduction in emission intensity, further reduce our greenhouse gas emission intensity an additional 10% over a 2010 baseline 

		Achieve 4 billion kW-hrs of energy savings through implementation of energy efficiency projects at our global facilities

		Build all new buildings to high energy efficiency standards by meeting the US Green Building Council’s LEED gold designation or better

		Increase the energy efficiency of our notebook and datacenter products 25 fold from a 2010 baseline


	In addition to the numerical goals above we will aggressively deploy new products and technologies that assist others in reducing their carbon emissions and we will publically track our progress to reduce our carbon footprint and compare our results to a widely-accepted international benchmark, the IPCC’s 2050 target.

INTERFACE

	We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action.  In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low carbon, sustainable future.

	We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters and the health of the global environment. 

	As a company focused on becoming a sustainable business, we’ve seen firsthand the benefits our business has enjoyed over the past 21 years as we’ve lowered the carbon footprint of our operations and our products.  Since 1997 we’ve reduced our GHG emissions by 73%.

	Building on Interface’s commitment to become a sustainable enterprise and reduce its Greenhouse Gas emissions, we commit to achieve the following by 2020:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 90%, compared to a 1996 baseline.

		Operate our global manufacturing sites with 100% renewable energy.

		Reduce the carbon footprint of our carpet tiles by 80% compared to a 1996 baseline.

		Offer verified climate neutral products to customers across our global business.

		Continue to develop long term business plans that align with the de-carbonization necessary to prevent global temperatures from rising more than 2 degrees centigrade.


INTERNATIONAL FLAVORS & FRAGRANCES

	International Flavors & Fragrances Inc. (IFF) is a leading innovator of sensorial experiences that move the world.  IFF has had efforts to mitigate climate change underway for many years.  Since establishing our 2020 goals for reducing energy use, GHG emissions, water use and hazardous waste we have made significant progress toward improving our eco-effectiveness and overall global environmental footprint.  By 2020, IFF pledges to: 


		Globally,  reduce our energy use by 20% and GHG emissions by 25%

		We have exceeded our target to reduce water usage by 25% and now pledge to reach an overall reduction of 50%  by 2020

		To reduce hazardous waste by 25%

		And, despite using less than 0.1 percent of the palm oil and palm kernel oil produced worldwide, our intention is to source all of our  palm oil sustainably to ensure that our palm oil supply chain does not contribute to deforestation and peat clearance


INTERNATIONAL PAPER

	International Paper is a leader in the use of renewable energy to manufacture our products.  Approximately 70 percent of the energy used in our global mill system is self-generated using renewable carbon neutral biomass residuals.   Our use of biomass residuals for energy displaces significant fossil fuel use and related GHG emissions.

	From a 2010 baseline, we improved energy efficiency by 6 percent (14 trillion Btu/year) and reduced our absolute greenhouse gas emissions by 8 percent (1.4 million tons of CO2e a year).   Since 2012, International Paper has invested $424 million globally in energy projects yielding great results.

	International Paper’s 2020 Sustainability goals include pledges over the next five years that will:


		Reduce absolute greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 20 percent (3.4 million tons of GHEe a year)

		Improve purchased energy efficiency by 15 percent (34 trillion Btu/year)


	These pledges build on International Paper’s ongoing sustainability goals established in 2010 which continue to improve our manufacturing efficiencies. 

	International Paper is committed to responsible forestry around the world and is a leader in the international effort to stop illegal logging and ensure timber legality in the global supply chain.  International Paper supports robust, ambitious measures in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement and future agreements like the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) that advance greater international action to combat illegal logging. 

INTEX SOLUTIONS, INC.

	Intex Solutions, Inc. pledges to continue our efforts to be leaders in energy and water conservation, and set an example for other enterprises.


		Intex Solutions, Inc. installed solar panels on our headquarters building 15 years ago.

		We measure all remaining carbon emissions and pays for offsets through the Carbon Fund 

		Measures all the electricity used while providing services in our clients buildings and pays for offsets to the Carbon Fund for any emissions related to that usage

		Won an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Small Business Award for energy saving measures such as lighting retrofits and giving employees energy efficient bulbs for their homes.


INTREN

	We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment.

	Since 2011, INTREN has participated in the Electric Utility Industry Sustainable Supply Chain Alliance to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.  As a key partner with these major utilities, we support the efforts of major businesses to set targets to positively impact climate change. 

	In continued support of this world-wide effort, INTREN pledges to:


		Reduce our greenhouse gas emissions annually by 10% through 2020 as measured by MTCO2e and continue to report this through the Electric Utility Industry Sustainable Supply Chain Alliance.

		Purchase 10% clean renewable electricity for our offices nationwide beginning in 2016.

		Open three new local offices by 2016 to reduce the commute time of workers and report this improvement through the Electric Utility Industry Sustainable Supply Chain Alliance.


INVENERGY

	Building on our track record of leadership in the development and operation of no- and low-carbon energy technologies, Invenergy pledges to:


		Increase our total deployment of renewable energy capacity by 30% by 2025, relative to today’s baseline of 4,746 megawatts.

		Supply American utility, commercial and industrial companies with 1 gigawatt of new wind and solar generation by 2020.

		Double our total deployment of advanced energy storage by 2020 from our 2015 total of 68 megawatts, which will enable additional deployment of renewables.


JETBLUE

	JetBlue applauds the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment.

	Aviation operates within the global business context and is preparing for global action on international aviation climate targets and measures to be taken at the 39th Assembly of the United Nations International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) in 2016. While not a direct part of the upcoming Conference of Parties negotiations in Paris, the airline industry has a vested interest in a strong outcome in Paris consistent with the industry’s existing voluntary pledge to reduce global emissions from commercial air travel in partnership with aircraft and engine manufacturers, the Federal Aviation Administration, and others. JetBlue’s goals to reduce emissions through flying technologies and biofuels research will be more easily achieved and less costly if the global political and business environment is supportive of and united behind a low-carbon future. We put forth our pledges as follows:


		JetBlue Airways pledges to develop long-term fuel-use and greenhouse gas emissions reduction plans that align with the deep decarbonization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C while growing our business and supporting growing economies.


	JetBlue pledges also pledges to:


		Support and invest in new technology to decrease flight emissions through more efficient operations. JetBlue has already committed approximately $20 million USD for mandated technology and will continue to supplement that effort for additional investment of $30 million USD for capabilities in data and long range satellite based communications to improve flying efficiency. With these investments JetBlue aims to save over 500,000 gallons of fuel burn per year within 30% of our schedule operation. This objective and more emissions savings will be possible if the Federal Aviation Administration complements our investment with infrastructure, procedural changes and controller training in the Caribbean region.

		Act on and contribute to industry-wide goals to improve fuel efficiency of 1.5% per year from 2009 to 2020; target a cap on net aviation CO2 emissions from 2020 (carbon-neutral growth); and reduce net aviation CO2 emissions of 50% by 2050, relative to 2005 levels.

		Develop a biofuel commitment in 2017 for use in our regular, commercial operations in the future.

		Transition our wholly-owned ground service equipment to electric ground service equipment where it is safe for our airport operations.


J.M. HUBER CORPORATION

	As a family-owned company for more than 130 years, thinking about future generations comes naturally to the J.M. Huber Corporation. We are a global business that holds leadership positions in a diverse range of engineered products across a broad mix of consumer and industrial applications. We conduct our business in accordance with our core values—the four Huber Principles, with our most important Principle focused on Environmental, Health, Safety & Sustainability.

	As part of our commitment to being a good corporate citizen and a responsible steward of the environment, we are lightening our environmental footprint at all of our global manufacturing locations and designing products with sustainable characteristics. Our efforts have been acknowledged by such honors as the prestigious IMD-Lombard Odier Global Family Business Award, which Huber received in 2013. This award recognizes family businesses for combining business performance with tradition, innovation and corporate social responsibility that contribute to a global economy.

	Over the years, we have taken many tangible steps to achieve world-class environmental performance. For example, since 2012, Huber has achieved an 8% reduction in our energy use intensity and a 12% reduction in our water use intensity. In addition, over 25% of the energy used at our more than 30 manufacturing plants is derived from renewable energy sources. 

	In the spirit of continuous improvement, we are strengthening our efforts to protect and preserve the environment. Going forward, a multi-year sustainability strategy that extends through 2025 will drive further improvements in energy and water use and waste management. We plan to achieve our goals by continuing to focus on the following key initiatives:


		Reduce our energy intensity through a systematic approach to equipment and process improvements and technological breakthroughs in our manufacturing and office environments.

		Incorporate and expand renewable energy sources into our energy use portfolio.

		Reduce our water use intensity.

		Improve our waste management through enhanced repurposing of waste streams and minimizing waste diverted to landfills

		Incorporate Life Cycle Analysis into our new product development efforts in order to produce products with improved sustainability characteristics.

		Collaborate with our customers and supply chain partners to reduce energy and water consumption and non-recycled waste. 


	Huber is proud to be doing our part to help make a difference for future generations—and the future of our planet.

JOHNSON & JOHNSON

	At Johnson & Johnson, we understand the intrinsic link between a healthy environment and human health. As the world’s largest and most broadly-based health care company, our mission is to help people live longer, healthier and happier lives. Our Credo defines our responsibilities to people and the planet, and our citizenship and sustainability practices are an important part of fulfilling this commitment.

	As part of our 2020 Citizenship & Sustainability Goals and as a continuation of our legacy in stewarding a healthy environment, we have established new science-based climate goals:


		Reduce our absolute carbon emissions by 20% by 2020 and 80% by 2050; and,

		Produce/Procure 20% of our electricity from clean/renewable energy sources by 2020; and, aspire to power all of our facilities with renewable energy by 2050.


JOHNSON CONTROLS

	Johnson Controls, a global multi-industrial company, has made public commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve sustainability since 2003.  From 2002 through 2014, we reduced our global greenhouse gas intensity by 41 percent and our energy intensity by 40 percent. Additionally, we have already achieved 21 percent of our 25 percent ten year energy intensity reduction goal in only five years as part of the U.S. DOE Better Plants Challenge.  We have also recently established updated corporate targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, energy, water and waste.

	From a 2014 baseline, Johnson Controls pledges the following by 2020:


		Reduce greenhouse gas intensity (in metric tons/revenue) by 15 percent

		Reduce energy intensity (in gigajoules/revenue) by 15 percent


	In addition, Johnson Controls pledges to provide our small and medium enterprise suppliers with energy management tools and training to help them become more energy efficient, sustainable and competitive.  We also commit to invest in the development of new products that expand our use of low-GWP alternatives to HFC refrigerants that best meet the safety, efficiency, reliability, availability, and financial requirements of our customers.

KAISER PERMANENTE

	As a health care provider, Kaiser Permanente feels a special responsibility to fight climate change and reduce pollutants that can lead to disease. Already a top user of green power, we will generate and buy enough wind and solar energy over the next two years to provide half of the electricity we use in California and reduce our greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent. This commitment to renewable energy is a natural extension of our mission to create healthy communities, and is just one aspect of an ambitious sustainability program that in recent years has:


		Reduced water intensity use by 10 percent

		Reduced waste by 41 percent

		Decreased the amount of meat per patient meal by 18 percent

		Increased the amount of locally gown/sustainably produced fruits and vegetables served to our patients to 50 percent

		Avoided vehicle trips through telehealth while improving health care


KELLOGG’S

	The purpose of Kellogg Company is to nourish families so they can flourish and thrive ─ from the farmers who grow our ingredients, to the employees who bring our values to life, and the consumers who buy our foods, all of whom want a better world for generations to come. We support the implementation of a strong climate change agreement coming out of Paris that ultimately puts us on a path toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	The body of science behind climate change has grown clearer and more focused. We recognize that failure to address global warming will make it difficult for Kellogg to continue to meet global food demand and ensure future generations will have a higher quality of life. Kellogg takes a comprehensive approach to reducing our environmental footprint by reducing our carbon emissions; the amount of waste we generate; and, the amount of natural resources we use. We are committed to participating in multiple programs addressing climate risk and transparency, including President Obama’s Climate Data Initiative and the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Global Open Data for Agriculture & Nutrition Initiative, and organizations such as Business for Innovative Climate & Energy Policy (BICEP) and the Bipartisan Policy Center (BPC). 

	As a leading global food company, today Kellogg is pledging to take additional steps, including to:


		Further reduce energy and GHG emissions by an additional 15% from 2015 performance; 

		Announce by the end of the year an even more aggressive overall carbon reduction goal that’s tied to the science, limiting further warming to 2 degrees Celsius, and which includes our agricultural supply chain;

		Expand the use of low carbon energy in plants by 50% by 2020;

		Implement water reuse projects in 25 percent of plants by 2020,and further reduce water use by an additional 15% from 2015 performance;

		Increase to 30% the number of plants sending zero waste to landfill by 2016;

		Achieve zero net deforestation by 2020 in high-risk supply chains including soy, palm oil, timber, fiber and soy; and

		Support livelihoods for 500,000 farmers, many of whom are women, through partnerships, research and training on climate smart agriculture which helps farmers adapt to climate change while assuring productivity of their yields and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from their agricultural practices.


KIMBALL ELECTRONICS 

	We are proud to say Kimball Electronics is a responsible guardian of our environmental resources, and respecting our planet has long been part of the fabric that is our company culture.

	One of our Guiding Principles states:  “The environment is our home. We will be leaders in not only protecting but enhancing our world.”

	Kimball Electronics operations are dedicated to eliminating pollution generated at the source, using renewable materials, and reclaiming and recycling materials, as shown by significant reductions (in absolute values) in these key environmental aspects from 2008 to 2014:


		Solid Waste - 74%

		Hazardous Waste - 41%

		VOC Air Emissions - 49%

		Greenhouse Gas Emissions - 1%

		Water Usage - 9%


	Our pledge is to remain committed to further absolute reductions in all these areas.

KINGSPAN INSULATED PANELS, INC.

	Building on a 2010 Kingspan Global Corporate pledge Kingspan Insulated Panels – North America pledges to:


		Savings of 1.4% per year beyond achieving the Better Plants goal (25% improvement in energy intensity) in 2015, cumulative CO2 emissions avoided by the end of the current pledge period (2021) is 10,615,053 kg.CO2.eq. By extending the pledge beyond 2021 with the same rate (1.4% per year), by the end of year 2025 Kingspan would achieve ~39% improvement in energy intensity. This is equivalent to avoiding CO2 emissions of 12,882,490 kg.CO2.eq.

		These Improvements energy efficiency and related Greenhouse Gases reductions are across 452,850 square feet of operations property in the United States.
		Kingspan’s Insulated Metal Panel products also contribute to high thermal performance as exterior enclosure solutions that reduce Demand Side Energy and related Greenhouse Gases. These products are specified on commercial/industrial projects and contribute to “green” building performance criteria.


KOHL’S DEPARTMENT STORES

	Kohl's is committed to protecting and conserving the environment by seeking innovative solutions that encourage long-term sustainability. While upholding our purpose of inspiring and empowering families to lead fulfilled lives, Kohl’s is taking big steps to ensure we leave a smaller footprint.  Kohl’s Department Stores remains committed to long-term sustainability by pledging to:


		Uphold our commitment to renewable energy. With over 160 on-site solar arrays in 13 states, and off-site procurement of wind and solar energy, Kohl’s continually searches for innovative solutions to incorporate renewable energy.  2015 will mark our sixth consecutive year of carbon neutrality. Beyond direct renewable energy sources, in 2016 Kohl’s will continue to procure carbon and Renewable Energy Credits (REC’s) to offset 100% annual carbon footprint*.

		Focus on conserving energy and driving down usage.  Kohl’s is committed to a 20 percent reduction in kWh-per-square-foot energy intensity by 2020 (baseline 2008). With over 990 ENERGY STAR certified buildings (approx. 84%) we are well on our way to meeting that reduction goal.

		Leverage the U.S. Green Building Council's (USGBC) Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design (LEED) rating systems to guide best practices in the design, construction and operations of our stores and corporate facilities.  As of November of 2015, over 39% of Kohl’s buildings (466) are LEED Certified.  As we grow and improve existing building performance, Kohl’s will continue to utilize LEED standards.

		Reduce water consumption through the installation of water-conserving plumbing fixtures, native and adaptive landscaping, and weather tracking irrigation controllers.  As a participant in the water pilot of the DOE’s Better Buildings Challenge, Kohl’s strives to reduce water use by 20% across our portfolio by 2020 (baseline 2008).

		Maintain an 85% operational recycling rate across stores, distribution facilities, and corporate offices. Kohl’s recycles more than 100,000 tons of cardboard, 10,000 tons of hangers, and more than 5 million pounds of plastic each year. In addition, Kohl’s construction projects follow a comprehensive Construction Waste Management Plan with a minimum 50% diversion goal.


	* For more detailed information on Kohl’s annual carbon footprint measurement, verification, and off-set’s reference Kohl’s Corporate Social Responsibility Report.

KPMG LLP

	Sustainability is an essential element of KPMG’s business strategy. Our responsibility to communities and the marketplace drives us to implement sustainable principles, which adds value for our clients and reflects the values of our professionals.  We are committed to reducing our impact on the environment, addressing local environmental challenges and working with clients to advance environmental sustainability.

	Our actions since 2007 include: achieving ambitious emissions reduction targets; optimizing air travel, reducing energy consumption, installing solar power and promoting energy efficiency; supporting collaborative projects with partners, such as the UN Global Compact and the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD); and serving as a leading provider of climate change and sustainability services for our clients.

	KPMG pledges to:


		Reduce net emissions by 10% per Full-Time Equivalent by 2020 against a baseline year 2015, building on our earlier success;

		Purchase 100% renewable energy for our offices by 2020;

		Continue to build new offices and major construction projects to U.S. Green Building Council LEED standards; and

		Introduce and promote new technologies, processes and workflows to help reduce travel.


LAKESHORE LEARNING MATERIALS

	Lakeshore Learning Materials pledges to:


		Invest $1 million in solar panels that will be installed by 2018 and will produce an estimated 4,500 MW of renewable energy by 2025

		Avoid 3,600 tons of greenhouse gas emissions by 2025 through the use of solar power

		Install motion-activated restroom fixtures that will reduce water use by 42,000 tons and conserve 68 tons of paper by 2025

		Conserve energy and resources with an active recycling program that will include the reuse of over 8,000 tons of cardboard by 2025

		Continue to invest in green projects similar to those Lakeshore has launched over the last several years, including the installation of electric vehicle charging stations, a switch to lower-impact packing materials, and the creation of a complete line of low-emission, environmentally friendly furniture


LAM RESEARCH

	In 2011, Lam formalized public environmental targets to reduce our environmental footprint, including energy and hazardous waste. Since 2011 we have reduced our energy consumption intensity by 21% and our hazardous waste generation intensity by 74%.

	To further build on these efforts we pledge to target the following by 2020:


		Increase renewable energy consumption in our domestic operations to 25%

		Reduce our greenhouse gas emission intensity by 20% from a 2012 baseline

		Achieve an accumulated 14 million kW-hrs of energy savings intensity through implementation of energy efficiency projects at our global facilities from a 2012 baseline

		Build all new buildings to EPA Energy Star standards

		Consistently increase the product and service offerings that enable customers to reduce energy usage, chemical consumption, and greenhouse gas emissions in their operations


	In addition to the goals above, we cascade our environmental management system requirements and expectations throughout our supply chain. Lam publicly tracks and makes available our sustainability progress in our annual Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) report and we benchmark performance to other leading companies in the semiconductor industry.

LEGRAND NA

	Legrand NA, the leading provider of products and systems for electrical installations and information networks wherever people live and work, is committed to integrating sustainability into the way we do business.  We are doing this by providing solutions that enable high performance sustainable buildings, reducing the environmental impacts of our operations, and improving employee and community welfare. 

	As part of our efforts to reduce the environmental impacts of our operations, we became Challenge Partner to the DOE Better Buildings, Better Plants initiative in 2011, pledging to reduce its energy intensity across 14 US sites by 25% within ten years over a 2009 baseline.  We exceeded this goal in 2012, achieving a 28% reduction. 

	Subsequently, Legrand NA reset its baseline to 2012 and has pledged to achieve an additional 25% reduction in energy intensity by 2022.   The cumulative reduction in energy intensity since 2009 now exceeds 38%. 

	Concurrent to establishing the new energy intensity target, Legrand NA has set a goal to reduce water intensity by 25% and to achieve zero-waste to landfill by 2022.

	In support of these goals, Legrand NA has joined the EPA SmartWay program as a means to help reduce the carbon emissions associated with our shipping requirements.  Legrand NA has also become a partner to the DOE EV Workplace Charging Challenge.

LENOVO

	Lenovo recognizes that climate change is a serious threat and believes that we should all do our part to reduce harmful greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Lenovo acknowledges and accepts the findings of current climate science which indicate a human contribution to climate change. We support the consensus conclusions of the scientific community described in the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The company accepts the call to action which arises from these conclusions.

	Lenovo is dedicated to reducing our global carbon footprint. We have developed a comprehensive strategy to address all aspects of our business, set aggressive objectives and targets, and we are measuring our performance against each objective and target to insure that we stay on track. Lenovo commits to absolute reductions in the emissions of greenhouse gasses from company operations and to drive and facilitate similar reductions in Lenovo’s supply chain and customer base through the implementation of a comprehensive climate change strategy. Lenovo’s climate change strategy shall be consistent with the findings of developing climate change science and a goal of maintaining global economic security.

	Lenovo pledges to:


		Reduce our global Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions by 40%, compared to a 2009 baseline, by 2020.

		Increase our renewable energy portfolio by annually increasing the percentage of energy purchased from renewable generation sources globally, relative to the previous fiscal year.

		Drive reductions in our products' energy use by showing improvements in energy efficiency relative to the previous generation of the product.


LEVI STRAUSS & CO.

	At Levi Strauss & Co., we believe that climate change mitigation is vital to the long-term success of our business, and the health and well-being of the people who make and buy our products. We’ve been working for decades to reduce our environmental impact in our operations and supply chain. Our vision is to reduce carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases through maximizing energy efficiency and using 100% renewable energy — first in our operations and then throughout the supply chain – and to continue to build sustainability into everything we do. We have been, and will continue to be, outspoken champions for public policies aimed at reducing greenhouse gases. 

	Levi Strauss & Co. pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions 25% by 2020 in our office, retail and distribution locations.

		At our owned and operated manufacturing plants, reduce greenhouse gas emissions 5% annually per product shipped.

		Purchase a minimum of 20% of our energy from renewable sources by 2020.

		Ensure that no forest-based materials that originate from the world’s ancient and endangered forests enter into our supply chain by 2020.


LINKEDIN

	LinkedIn's cultural values of integrity, collaboration and transformation create an imperative for us to measurably reduce the environmental impact of our business. As part of that effort, we pledge to:


		Make measurable and sustained progress toward our ultimate goal of powering our operations with 100% renewable energy. 

		Locate, design and operate our workplaces and data centers with very high sustainability standards to reduce employee commutes, energy, waste and water use. 

		Increase education for our employees to practice sustainable approaches to transportation, energy, food, waste, and water use. 


L’OREAL USA

	By the year 2020, L’Oreal will:


		Reduce CO2 emissions at our plants and distribution centers by 60% in absolute terms, from a 2005 baseline.

		Reduce our water consumption by 60% per finished product unit, from a 2005 baseline.

		Reduce waste by 60% per finished product unit, from a 2005 baseline.

		Send zero waste to landfill.

		Reduce our CO2 emissions from transportation of products by 20% per finished product unit from a 2011 baseline.

		Source 100% renewable raw materials from sustainable sources. We also confirm our ambition to “Zero Deforestation” to include:
		

				By 2020, the goal is 100% of palm supply will be free from deforestation.

				By 2020, the goal is to have 100% certified board and paper for packaging and POS (promotional material)




MARS

	Mars, Incorporated has established a set of ambitious, science-based goals designed to drive our global operations toward being Sustainable in a Generation (SIG). Under these SIG goals, and as part of our broader sustainability programs, Mars pledges to:


		Reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and eliminate 100% of GHG emissions from our operations by 2040. We are on track to reduce our 2015 GHG emissions by 25% (from a 2007 baseline);

		Pursue renewable energy projects around the world that are modeled after the 118-turbine, 200mw wind farm we brought online in 2015 and which now provides the equivalent of 12% of our global energy requirements, 100% of our U.S. power needs, and has eliminated 24% of our global GHG;

		Achieve zero waste to landfill across all of our facilities globally by the end of 2015;

		Build all of our new sites globally to the LEED Gold Standard;

		Continue to build on our current deforestation policy, which covers the key raw materials in our supply chain (including palm oil, beef, pulp, paper and soy), and source only from producers and suppliers who agree to our strict sourcing standards;

		Use our voice, our expertise and our position as a leading global company to identify and advance innovative carbon reduction measures within the agriculture and food sectors, and continue to encourage governments to set clear, achievable, measurable and enforceable science-based targets for carbon emissions reductions.


MCDONALD’S CORPORATION

	McDonald’s believes climate change presents a significant global challenge that, if left unaddressed, will have far-reaching implications for generations to come. As a global food company, we depend on healthy ecosystems and communities around the world to help produce the food and beverages our customers love. As a modern and progressive burger company, we recognize the role we play in addressing this important challenge and doing what we can to reduce our carbon footprint. We aspire to develop and operate the most environmentally-efficient McDonald’s restaurants and to source our food and packaging sustainably.

	McDonald’s puts forth our pledges as follows:

Deforestation: As demonstrated by our endorsement of the United Nations’ New York Declaration on Forests in 2014 and our Commitment on Deforestation made in April 2015, McDonald’s is committed to eliminating deforestation from our global supply chain. We will focus our initial efforts on beef, fiber-based packaging, palm oil, coffee, and soy used for beef & poultryfeed, given their link to deforestation. We will share time-bound deforestation-free targets for these priority products by the end of this year.

Beef: McDonald’s supports the sustainable production of beef. We helped found the Global Roundtable for Sustainable Beef (GRSB) to bring together key stakeholders around a common purpose. In 2014, the GRSB led a collaborative effort to finalize global principles and criteria for sustainable beef production which, among other focus areas, involves managing natural resources responsibly and working to enhance ecosystem health. We are developing goals and will begin purchasing a portion of our beef from verified, sustainable sources starting in 2016.

Palm Oil: By 2020, our goal is for 100% of the palm oil used in our restaurants worldwide and as an ingredient in McDonald’s products to be verified as having come from a system that supports sustainable palm oil production. We will continue encouraging McDonald’s palm oil suppliers to move toward traceable and transparent palm oil supply chains as a way to ensure no deforestation.

Fiber: By 2020, our goal is to source 100% of fiber-based packaging from recycled or certified sources. As the first global restaurant business in World Wildlife Fund's (WWF) Global Forest & Trade Network, we support its initiative to eliminate illegal logging and transform the global marketplace to save the world’s valuable and threatened forests.

Coffee: By 2020, our goal is to have 100% of our coffee verified as supporting sustainable production. We will work with globally recognized programs and provide support for coffee farmers through initiatives such as our technical assistance project in Guatemala.

Restaurant Energy:


		Energy Efficiency: Our goal is to increase energy efficiency 20% by 2020 in company-owned restaurants in our top markets, with a focus on restaurant design standards, equipment innovation and operational practices. As we continue to advance our strategic work in this area, we expect to evolve the structure, metrics, and scope of these aspirations in the next year using an appropriate baseline.

		Renewable Energy 
		

				McDonald’s USA is a signatory to the Corporate Renewable Energy Buyers’ Principles, developed by WWF and World Resources Institute (WRI). We support a shared mission to increase access to cost-competitive renewable energy across the McDonald’s U.S. system.

				In 2014, the McDonald’s company-owned restaurants and franchisees in Europe purchased 76% of their electricity from renewable sources across 21 markets, 10 of which have achieved or are working toward purchasing 100% renewable electricity. McDonald’s U.K. has committed for a 20-year period to purchase renewable energy directly from new infrastructure.




Restaurant Waste & Recycling: Our goal is to minimize waste and increase the amount of in-restaurant recycling to 50% by 2020 in our top markets, which involves efforts such as packaging optimization and expanding our recycling of materials including corrugated cardboard and used cooking oil.

MESA ASSOCIATES, INC.

	Mesa pledges to:


		Maintain and improve our green procurement practices through education and training of employees.

		Reduce our carbon footprint by installing energy-saving devices in our largest two facilities. Mesa will complete our investment of over $1.2 million in the first quarter of 2016 that will result in energy reductions of over 1 million kW per year.

		Increase our recycling program through green purchases and employee education.

		Maintain a sustainability committee that continually evaluates our progress and identifies new opportunities for sustainable practices in our business operations.


MGM RESORTS INTERNATIONAL

	Being a responsible steward of Earth’s natural resources is among our top priorities at MGM Resorts International. We believe that businesses have an obligation to implement environmental practices and to lead the way for others when they can. That’s why we pledge to:


		Reduce energy consumption by 20 percent by 2020. We’ll do so by identifying more ways to conserve resources and reduce consumption throughout the company’s resort destinations while continuing to seek clean energy sources.

		Continue to educate our 62,000 employees about sustainable practices through our Green Advantage program. By enlisting employees in our environmental efforts, we can maximize our positive influence on the planet and inspire others to join us in adopting sustainable business practices.


MICROSOFT

	At Microsoft, we’re committed to driving environmentally sustainable business practices and catalyzing technology innovations that help people and organizations around the world to realize a sustainable future. Microsoft pledges to:


		Maintain carbon neutral operations for our datacenters, offices, labs, manufacturing facilities, and business air travel.

		Purchase 100% renewable energy for the operations of our datacenters, offices, labs, and manufacturing facilities.

		Offset 100% of emissions from business air travel through supporting carbon offset projects that also drive social benefits in emerging nations.


MONDELEZ INTERNATIONAL

	We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment.  We put forth our goals as follows:

	Building on actions to reduce manufacturing emissions by 16% per tonne from 2010-14 – equaling roughly 340,000 tonnes reduction of annual CO2 emissions – by 2020* Mondelēz International will:


		Reduce its carbon footprint by:
		

				Adopting science-based targets to reduce absolute CO2 emissions from manufacturing by 15 percent. This aligns with current approaches to setting science-based targets to support the global effort to limit climate change to less than 2º C. The company is also switching from reporting emissions per tonne to a more demanding absolute basis; and
				

						Addressing deforestation within key agriculture supply chains, primarily in cocoa and palm oil.  The company will measure and, as progress is made on the ground, report publicly the resulting end-to-end carbon footprint reduction.





		Cut its water footprint by reducing absolute incoming water use in manufacturing, focusing on priority sites where water is most scarce. The company aims for 10 percent reduction at those priority sites. 

		Reduce waste by eliminating 65,000 tonnes of packaging, without contributing to food waste; and

		Reduce total manufacturing waste by 20 percent.


* By 2020 vs 2013 baseline: Mondelēz International’s first full year of operations.

MONSANTO

	Monsanto pledges to:

Internal Operations:


		Monsanto GHG Operational Footprint Goal- Reduce Crop Protection Greenhouse Gas Emissions by an additional 22% on a per product basis by 2020 (baseline 2010). This represents a cumulative reduction of 45% from 2002.

		Company Commits to Increase Irrigation Water Efficiency Across Operations, Saving 30 to 80 Billion Gallons of Fresh Water Every Year by 2020 (baseline 2010).


Collaborations and offerings to growers:


		Climate Corporation provides growers have the opportunity to utilize data analytics and monitor nitrogen in corn production on a field by field basis.  This is one of several features that supports sustainable intensification- maximum productivity with the optimal amount of inputs.

		Through collaborations Monsanto will safely and sustainably innovate through advanced breeding and biotechnology to advance new plant varieties and hybrids as well as precision management tools that give farmers more choices to measurably improve nutrient use efficiency and curb greenhouse gas emissions on at least one million acres in the United States by 2020.

		Through collaborations Monsanto will drive cover crop research trials on over 100 locations across the Midwest to validate economic and yield benefits to both growers and society.

		University of Chicago research compared the impact of the 2012 drought relative to the last significant drought in 1988 and the impact of improved technology for farmers. That research showed that if farmers in the 2012 drought had been limited to the same agronomic choices they had in 1988, production would have been reduced by 25 percent. Monsanto has recently supported the extension of this work to understand the impact that changes in climate and water availability could have on North American crop production


NATIONAL GRID

	National Grid is an international electricity and gas company based in the UK and northeastern US. We play a vital role in connecting millions of people safely, reliably, and efficiently to the energy they use.

	We are at the heart of the great challenge of our time—climate change—which means delivering energy in a way that supports our world long into the future.

	We continue to work with all our stakeholders to promote the development and implementation of sustainable, innovative and affordable energy solutions.  To solve the climate change challenge— every player in the energy supply chain, including system operators, generators, distributors, and policy makers—must collaborate at a level never seen before.

	We are proud that our work, and our people, underpin the prosperity and wellbeing of our customers, communities and investors.

	In support of our continued commitment to address climate change, National Grid pledges the following:


		Reduce GHG emissions 80% by 2050, from our 1990 base line, and 45% by 2020

		As a founding member of One Future - a natural gas industry sector wide initiative - support its goal to reduce methane emissions across the natural gas industry to no more than 1 percent of national gross production by 2025


NATIONAL LABEL COMPANY

	National Label Company, for more than 100 years, has operated with the utmost respect for its employees, customers, suppliers, and community. With this value in mind, National Label strives to become a corporate environmental steward throughout all aspects of the organization. National Label has set the following sustainability goals as a sign of its commitment.


		Continue and expand Waste to Energy programs

		Offer 100% sustainable Raw Materials that have zero net deforestation

		Offer sustainable Raw Materials that reduce material calipers up to 15%

		Reduce energy used per label 10% by 2020

		Reduce corrugate consumption 15% by 2020

		Reduce GHG emissions 20% by 2020

		Produce or Purchase 20% Renewable Energy by 2020


NESTLÉ USA

	As a global nutrition, health and wellness company operating in 197 countries, we continue to build on our commitments by tackling climate change and decreasing the environmental impact of our business. Nestlé pledges to:


		Nestlé has worked to reduce GHG emissions in our factories for over 10 years. We are committed to a reduction of 35%, compared to a 2005 baseline, by end of 2015. 

		In May 2015, Nestlé announced 25 manufacturing factories in the U.S. achieved zero waste to landfill.  By the end of the year, 30% of our U.S. factories will achieve the landfill free status. Moving us closer to our commitment to be landfill free in all U.S. factories by 2020. 

		Nestlé has invested more than $61 million in energy efficiency efforts and has increased onsite consumption from renewable resources by 24% compared to 2010.  As a member of RE100, we are committed to identifying a path by 2017 for achieving 100% renewable electricity.  We will also develop a low-carbon energy plan for each US operating facility to use renewable energy where possible by 2016 and encourage the utilities where we operate to shift to low-carbon energy mix.  


	Globally, Nestlé plans a reduction of water use by 40% by the end of 2015, with a baseline year of 2005.  By 2016, we will implement projects in California facilities that will save 144 million gallons of water annually.

NEWS CORP

	At News Corp, we are committed to growing sustainably, minimizing our environmental impacts and inspiring others to take action. All of our businesses are working together to tackle these goals by measuring, reporting, and taking action to reduce our impacts. The three pillars underpinning our Global Environmental Initiative -- reduce, engage and source responsibly -- have resulted in a 29% reduction of our carbon footprint in 2014 compared to our 2006 baseline.

	News Corp pledges to:


		Reduce absolute carbon emissions 40% by 2020 vs our 2006 baseline, with the aim to align with the global goal of keeping warming to less than 2 degrees C. 

		Achieve zero waste across our owned print centers by the end of 2016.

		Continue to purchase 100% of our publication paper from mills whose forest management practices are certified.

		Continue to publicly report our climate and forest environmental impacts through the CDP.

		Support and actively evaluate new opportunities to power our facilities with renewable energy, adding to our existing 4.1 MW of solar power.


NIKE

	At NIKE, everything we do begins with the athlete.  We know that climate-related issues like pollution may impact an athlete’s ability to perform.  That’s why NIKE, Inc. has been working for over a decade to cut energy use and greenhouse gas emissions throughout our value chain.  We will continue to harness the power of sustainable innovation to reduce our impacts and help protect the future of sport.  As part of this work NIKE, Inc. pledges to:


Reach 100% renewable energy in our owned or operated facilities by 2025.   NIKE, Inc. already sources renewable energy through on-site generation at some global facilities, and we are actively exploring advancing on-site renewable energy generation at additional owned or operated facilities. To supplement the on-site generation, we will look to procure off-site renewable energy.  This will include all owned or operated facilities where NIKE is responsible for energy purchasing decisions. Additionally, NIKE will continue the work that we have led for more than a decade with contract factories to help them implement programs to understand their energy use and climate impacts, increase their energy efficiency, and reduce their carbon emissions.

Participate in the Better Buildings Challenge, run by the U.S Department of Energy.  In line with the challenge criteria outlined by the USDOE, NIKE, Inc. has committed to reducing energy consumption over a ten year period in a majority of owned or operated facilities within the U.S. portfolio by 20% and will publicly share milestones of progress towards this goal.

Advance materials innovation. Growing, creating and processing raw materials represents the greatest environmental impact across NIKE’s value chain.  NIKE recently launched a challenge with MIT Climate CoLab to find revolutionary new ideas for engaging industries, designers and consumers in valuing, demanding and adopting low-impact materials. We believe there are significant innovation opportunities ahead in this area and we are working to unlock the barriers to developing and scaling a new palette of more sustainable materials. 


NOVARTIS

	Our aim is to be a leader in health, safety and environmental protection.  Since 2010 when our last set of environmental targets were launched, we have made considerable progress towards sustainability goals. This year we have set renewed, more aggressive targets for 2020 as we work towards a 2030 vision. These include:


Target 2020: Reduce our total Scope 1 and Scope 2 greenhouse gas emissions by 30% versus 2010. 

Vision 2030: Reduce our total Scope 1 and Scope 2 greenhouse gas emissions by 50% versus 2010. 


Internal carbon price:  To help drive the projects that will help us achieve these goals, Novartis will now employ an internal carbon price, set at $100 per ton of carbon dioxide emitted.  This will prompt us to think smarter and prioritize our projects and actions for effective greenhouse gas reduction in the future.

	For more information: https://www.novartis.com/about-us/corporate-responsibility/our-world

NOVOZYMES

	Novozymes biological solutions are efficient and sustainable in their effects.  With over 700 products that reduce energy needs, raw material requirements and environmental waste in their use by our customers, Novozymes is able through life cycle analysis to demonstrate CO2 emission reductions.


		Prior to 2015 Novozymes established long term goals to deliver 75 million tons of CO2 emission reductions annually through the use of our products.

		This year, Novozymes increased its ambition for emission reductions and now targets 100 million tons of CO2 reductions annually by 2020.


NRG ENERGY

	Our ambitious 2014 pledge includes to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by 2030, and by 90% by 2050, compared to a 2014 baseline, while growing our business and creating value for our shareholders. We plan to achieve these goals through the following actions:


		Capture and sequester carbon emissions for fossil fired power plants

		Optimize plant performance with equipment and efficiency upgrades

		Develop utility distributed renewable energy systems

		Drive demand for the clean energy future with like-minded individuals and companies

		Convert coal-fired power plants to natural gas

		Gradually retire aging coal plants


	In addition to setting this science based target, NRG aspires to be a “net-zero by 2050” company and pledging to:


		Report climate change information in mainstream reports as a fiduciary duty

		Responsible corporate engagement in climate policy


ONE3LED

	Our company, consisting of only 5000 square feet and 15 employees, has reduced our greenhouse gas emissions by 19 metric tons by implementing measures such as full LED lighting, daylight harvesting, and comprehensive recycling procedures. Co-founded by two young brothers from Missouri, One3LED is living proof that even the smallest businesses can do their part to help alleviate climate change.

	By its very definition, reduction of carbon emissions is saving the world. This is why we have dedicated our entire business model to helping other businesses do the same. Since 2012 One3LED has completed over 400 LED lighting projects across the U.S. reducing carbon emissions by an estimated 19,000 metric tons. The environmental comparable of this reduction is planting 15,000 acres of U.S. forests, taking 4,000 cars off the road, and erecting five industrial wind turbines. 

	Our commitment to action doesn't end with just businesses though. In 2014 One3LED created a non-profit giving program called “Change The Bulb” that focuses on bringing energy efficiency LED lighting to low-income families and nonprofit businesses. The program provides their homes and buildings with otherwise unattainable energy savings by replacing energy-wasting lighting with LED.

	Building on our previous commitments, One3LED pledges to continue our mission of energy efficiency and environmental advocacy and raise of efforts by 2019 through: 

	Reducing our own carbon footprint:


		Install solar panels on our building.

		Implement energy efficient HVAC systems.

		Use all recycled materials for our business cards, customer presentation materials, and office supplies. 


	Assisting other businesses:


		Double our greenhouse gas reduction assistance from 19,000 metric tons to 38,000.

		Dedicate a section of our website to carbon footprint reduction education.

		Expand our business model to encompass other clean energy technology such as lighting controls, HVAC, and water conservation systems. 

		Provide free lighting-based carbon footprint reduction seminars to businesses and organizations.


	Assisting low-income homes and non-profit organizations:


		Reach 1000 inner city families.

		Expand our work with Habitat for Humanity to an additional metropolitan area in the U.S each year.

		Continue to work with LED lighting manufactures to donate their overstock and/or previous generation products to inner city schools to use in their classrooms and gymnasiums. 

		Provide non-profit organizations with free energy-reduction lighting assessments.

		Continue the international Change The Bulb program with at least one mission per year.


ORMAT TECHNOLOGIES, INC. 

	For over 50 years, we have supported the development and operation of clean and renewable energy generation, focused on geothermal, recovered Energy Generation (REG) and other renewable energy technologies.  Today, Ormat generates over 500 MW of clean, renewable, energy in the United States (out of 666 MW worldwide), and has provided over 2,000 MW of installed capacity worldwide of its “best-in-breed” technology.

	We believe that action on climate change is imperative, and that growth in renewable electricity generation will continue to play a monumental role in meeting those climate change goals set forth today.  We also support, and believe in, achieving more than the goals set in place today and the move towards 100% renewable generation as soon as possible.

	We pledge to:


		Continue to develop and build clean, renewable, and reliable generation facilities through sound investment and long term operation.

		Continue to implement clean technologies, conserve water and reduce carbon footprint at our manufacturing facilities

		Commercialize and deploy new clean technologies, such as flexible geothermal generation and energy storage, to allow for the further reduction of fossil-fuel based generation.

		Produce over 4.5 million MWh of clean and renewable energy annually, offsetting over 4.4 million tons of CO2 from coal fired power plants.

		Promote the importance of renewable energy and climate change through education at the local, state, and federal levels by sharing our experiences and opening our doors for those who wish to understand what we do as a clean energy company.


PACIFIC ETHANOL

	Since committing to produce low carbon, renewable fuel in 2006, Pacific Ethanol has produced and sold a cumulative 1.2 billion gallons of ethanol with a carbon intensity value 50% lower than gasoline. Building on these accomplishments, Pacific Ethanol pledges to:


		By 2025, supply over 515 million gallons per year of low carbon ethanol to the market with a 50% reduction of GHG on a relative basis (g/MJ) compared to gasoline.    

		By 2025, produce a minimum of 50 million gallons per year of ultra-low carbon ethanol that will reduce GHG emissions by 90% on a relative basis (g/MJ) compared to gasoline. 

		We further pledge to reduce our process carbon emissions by 40% by 2025, as part of an effort to develop long-term business plans that align with the deep decarbonization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C.


PATHEON

	Patheon Commits to:


		Solid Waste: A commitment of zero waste to landfill by year 2020. 

		Energy:  A 30% reduction in energy use by year 2020 normalized by revenue to a 2010 baseline year

		Water:  A 10% reduction in water withdrawal by year 2020 normalized by revenue to a 2014 baseline year


PEPSI

	At PepsiCo, we recognize that limiting global warming to 2° Celsius is absolutely critical to our future and reiterate our call for collective action and our commitment to implementing solutions that will help achieve this goal.  PepsiCo pledges to:


		Utilizing PepsiCo’s Sustainable Farming Initiative, expand the use of sustainable farming practices to 500,000 acres of farmland used by our North American agricultural suppliers in our corn, oats, potato, and citrus supply chains by the end of 2016.

		Continue to implement hydrofluorocarbon (HFC)-free point-of-sale equipment (coolers, vending machines and fountain dispensers) to meet the goal that all of our new equipment in the U.S. will be HFC-free by 2020.

		Continue to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions from our global fleet through the use of electric, hybrid, compressed natural gas, alternative fuel vehicles and other fuel efficiency programs.

		Strive for zero deforestation in our business operations and global supply chain by 2020.

		Utilize the data generated and best practices learned at our facilities employing photovoltaic systems in the U.S. to help inform future solar installations and meet our goal of achieving an absolute greenhouse gas reduction.

		Strive to increase the amount of recycled content in our global packaging, as we have in our U.S. beverage packaging which included 111 million pounds of rPET in 2014.


PG&E

	As a provider of electricity and natural gas to millions of Californians, PG&E understands our responsibility to manage our carbon footprint, advance policies that put California and the country on a cost-effective path toward a low-carbon economy, and address the emerging need to adapt to changing climate conditions.  We also remain focused on advancing and providing customers—and our employees—with industry-leading tools and incentives to help them manage and reduce their energy use and capitalize on new, clean energy technologies.

	We want the actions we take and decisions we make regarding climate change to enable a better quality of life for our customers, communities and the planet. As a company with a mission rooted in public service, we have a distinct role to play in being a catalyst and advocate for clean energy innovation and a low-carbon economy, advancing economic growth and opportunity, and driving solutions to local and global environmental challenges.

	In support of our continued commitment to combating climate change, PG&E proposes to achieve the following by 2020:


Facilitate Deployment and Integration of Low-Carbon, Clean Energy Technologies:


Provide our nearly 16 million customers with an electricity supply that is more than 60 percent carbon-free, making it one of the cleanest electricity supply portfolios of any investor-owned utility in the country.

Support the implementation of the Clean Power Plan by working with the state of California and other stakeholders to ensure its effective implementation.

Plan a total grid investment of approximately $3 billion a year to both modernize the grid to make it more resilient and facilitate our vision of the Grid of Things™—a grid that will integrate distributed solar, energy storage, electric vehicles and other low-carbon technologies.

Expand the system-wide deployment of our mobile gas leak detection system that uses the most sophisticated, cutting-edge technology to find more natural gas leaks faster—helping to improve our ability to prioritize repairs and replacements, which enhances public safety and reduces the amount of methane released to the atmosphere.



Support Our Customers and Communities:


Continue to lead and innovate on energy efficiency by helping our customers save approximately 4,400 GWh of electricity and 90 million therms of natural gas, avoiding about the same amount of power used by 600,000 homes in PG&E’s service area.

Weatherize 500,000 homes to help low-income customers reduce energy use, better manage energy costs, and increase safety, health and comfort.

Facilitate the rapid adoption of rooftop solar installations by improving upon our current ability to interconnect a solar system in three days or less—among the fastest process times in the nation—to the point where our interconnection process is fully automated.

Dedicate more than $5 million over the next five years to continue to invest in partnerships that support clean energy deployment in underserved communities, including support for solar and renewable energy education and funding for solar panel installations in underserved communities, working in partnership with non-profit organizations.

Work with regulators to agree on programs that will allow continued acceleration of repairs and replacements to eliminate non-hazardous methane leaks in our natural gas distribution system to maintain a near zero “workable” leaks backlog and further reduce other minor leak backlogs.



Take Action in Our Operations and Encourage Our Employees to Do the Same:


Expand our fleet of alternative-fuel vehicles—one of the nation’s largest among electric and gas utilities—by investing at least one-third of our annual fleet procurement spend in electric vehicles, totaling more than $100 million.

Achieve top decile performance in facility energy and water reduction among industry peers—reducing the environmental footprint of our facilities (as reduced energy and water use translates into greenhouse gas savings), while also providing an enhanced workplace for our employees.

Build upon our existing employee incentive programs that offer discounts for rooftop solar installation and the purchase of electric vehicles to encourage employees to take action at their homes.




POET

	Since 2005, POET has reduced its greenhouse gas emissions intensity by nearly 14%. As one of the world’s largest producers of renewable fuel, POET pledges to:


		Produce over 1.7 billion gallons of low carbon ethanol annually, with a 35% reduction of greenhouse gas emissions compared to gasoline.

		Produce 820 million gallons of cellulosic ethanol by 2025 across the POET footprint at a 75% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions compared to gasoline.

		Develop long-term business plans that allow POET to be good stewards of the Earth by converting renewable resources to energy and other valuable goods as effectively as humanly possible.


PORTLAND GENERAL ELECTRIC

	PGE has been supportive of a national policy to reduce global warming for nearly a decade and is actively reducing its carbon emissions through specific actions. This global challenge should be addressed at the federal level by achieving real carbon reductions across all sectors of the economy. We are pursuing prudent, sustainable energy actions while maintaining system reliability and affordability for all our customers.

	As a provider of electricity to nearly 850,000 Oregonians, PGE pledges to:


		Implement our plan to end use of coal at Oregon’s only coal-fired power plant by December 31, 2020

		Add more than 800 megawatts of new renewable energy, on top of more than 700 megawatts of new wind generation we’ve already built, bringing our mix to one-third new and legacy renewable power in average hydro years by the end of 2025

		Optimize cost-effective integration of renewable resources by joining the western energy imbalance market in late 2017, acquiring an additional 5 megawatt hours’ worth of energy storage by 2020, and pursuing a water heater load-control and storage pilot program

		Advance our smart grid initiatives to improve the efficiency and resilience of the transmission and distribution system, including work on conservation voltage reduction, smart switches, and transformer replacements and spares

		Continue investments in our hydroelectric plants, along with habitat and water improvement projects, to retain access to this sustainable, carbon-free power for our customers

		Diversify our renewable portfolio with cost-effective solar projects, adding to our existing 16 megawatts of PGE-owned solar facilities and solar power purchase agreements while continuing our support for customer-side solar installations

		Use our integrated resource planning process to evaluate and pursue further climate-friendly resource strategies, including ongoing efforts to help customers make efficient use of energy
		

				Capture all cost-effective energy efficiency as our first resource choice

				Expand demand response and dynamic pricing to reduce the need for new generation



		Maintain high growth in our nationally top-ranked voluntary renewable power program and continue helping local governments and schools with “Green Power Community” strategies, sustainable buildings, solar projects and electric vehicle charging stations

		Promote vehicle electrification to help reduce carbon emissions from the transportation sector
		

				Install charging stations at all PGE sites and incent EV adoption by employees

				Fulfill our Edison Electric Institute pledge to devote 5 percent of our fleet vehicle budget to fleet electrification

				Continue working to ensure the driving public has access to charging infrastructure




PROCTER & GAMBLE

	Procter & Gamble (P&G) has had comprehensive efforts to address energy and climate underway for many years.  Our long term vision is to power our plants with 100% renewable energy.   As we continue to drive our efforts on climate change forward, P&G pledges to:


		Reduce absolute GHG emissions by 30% by 2020 (vs. a 2010 baseline) – a goal that is consistent with science-based methodologies that are helping companies align targets with climate science

		Achieve 30% Renewable Energy powering our plants globally by 2020
		

				As a significant action step towards this goal, we will manufacture our Fabric & Home Care products in North America with 100% wind power. To accomplish this, we have partnered with EDF RE to develop a new wind farm in Texas, to bring 100 MW renewable power on line, equivalent of eliminating 200,000 metric tons of GHG emissions per year. 



		Promote Cold Water Washing for machine laundering of clothes – with a target of 70% of all machine loads being done in cold water by 2020

		Build a traceable palm oil supply chain and ensure palm oil suppliers have implemented no deforestation policies and practices by 2020.

		Have 100% of the virgin wood fiber used in our tissue/towel and absorbent hygiene products be 3rd party certified by 2015.  Have 100% of our paper packaging be either recycled content or 3rd party certified virgin material by 2020.


PROLOGIS

	We are proud to be the global leader in industrial real estate and the world’s foremost provider of sustainable logistics facilities. Our commitment to minimizing the environmental and social impacts of our operations and development activities is longstanding, as is our commitment to delivering long-term value to our customers, investors, employees and communities. We establish goals, track progress and report outcomes across our portfolio for the three dimensions of sustainability (ESG): Environmental – impact  of our portfolio and corporate operations;  Social - relationships with employees, customers, investors and communities; and Governance – organizational policies, procedures and practices.

	We are pleased to support the American Business Act on Climate Pledge with other leading companies, and we commit to the following sustainability targets:


		Design 100% of new development projects with a goal of certification where recognized rating systems are available;

		Continue to work towards 100% energy-efficient lighting upgrades in the global portfolio;

		Reduce energy consumption in the global portfolio 20% by 2020 compared to a 2011 baseline;

		Connect 15 megawatts of rooftop solar each year, with a long-term goal of connecting 200 megawatts by 2020; 

		Reduce our corporate carbon footprint 20% by 2020 compared to a 2011 baseline.


PWC US

	In 2007, we set a carbon reduction goal and developed programs to cut our GHG emissions 20% (vs 2007 baseline). Since that time we have exceeded our reduction goal through various initiatives including building a LEED Gold-certified data center and virtualizing over 2,800 of its servers. This has also enabled us to deliver on our commitment to a modern, flexible and efficient workplace for our employees. As a result, we have reduced redundant square footage per employee, decreased our travel emissions, and put in place virtual collaboration technologies.

	 We are now extending our goal and pledging to:


		Reduce GHG emissions 45% by 2020 (vs. 2007 baseline),

		Power our workspaces with 100% renewable energy (RECs) while continuously improving their efficiency and achieving LEED certifications in our new buildouts, and

		Continue to support flexibility and deploy technologies that aid in reducing ground and air travel, purchase forestry offsets in order to continue to reduce the impact of our air travel, and support our local communities’ environmental conservation efforts.


QUALCOMM

	Qualcomm’s pledges to:


		Reduce absolute Scope 1 and 2 greenhouse gas emissions from global operations by 30%, compared to a 2014 baseline, by 2025


RICOH USA

	Ricoh pledges to:

Reduce greenhouse gas emissions:


		Advanced nations need to reduce their environmental impact to one-eighth the fiscal 2000 levels by 2050. Based on this, the Ricoh Group has established mid- and long-term environmental impact reduction goals for three key areas: energy conservation, resource conservation, and pollution prevention. Ricoh sets the target to reduce the company’s total lifecycle CO2 emissions by 30% by 2020 and by 87.5% by 2050 from the 2000 level.

		 As part of Ricoh’s commitment, we have continuously improved the energy efficiency of our products. As a result, the average energy consumption of our ENERGY STAR certified color Multifunctional Printers has decreased more than 70% over the last 7 years

		 In addition, we will install a solar farm system at our ENERGY STAR certified corporate facility in New Jersey by 2016 in order to partially offset its energy expenditure.


Resource Conservation and Recycling 


		Ricoh's goal is to reduce the new input of resources by 25% by 2020 and by 87.5% by 2050 from the 2007 level. To reach that goal, we utilize materials in the most effective way possible. We are making our products smaller and lighter, employing parts with longer lifecycles, recycling and reusing parts and products, and expanding the use of renewable resources.


RIO TINTO

	Rio Tinto recognises that climate change is occurring and is largely caused by human activities. We believe that global energy and climate challenges are best met by companies, governments and society working together.

	Meeting the growth in global energy demand will require increased energy efficiency, technological innovation and a mix of energy sources: fossil fuels, nuclear and renewable energy sources. Rio Tinto’s products, such as copper and aluminum, are integral to achieving the energy efficiency and technological innovations that are required to meet global energy and climate challenges. 

	Rio Tinto pledges to:


		Set quantified emissions intensity reduction goals. In 2008 we set a target of ten per cent reduction in total greenhouse gas emissions intensity to be achieved by 2015. At the end of 2014, we had achieved a reduction of 18 per cent compared with 2008. We will set a new emissions intensity target by the end of 2015.

		Work to reduce our emissions intensity

		Seek a substantial decarbonisation of our business by 2050.

		Adapt to climate change by making our businesses and projects resilient to climate change impacts.

		Recognise the value of action on climate change when planning for the future and making investment decisions.

		Work with others and engage with a range of stakeholders.

		Engage in policy debates particularly concerning industry policy, market-based mechanisms and economic impacts.


RM2 

	RM2 USA and the RM2 group specialize in pallet development, manufacture, supply and management to establish a leading presence in global pallet supply and improve the supply chain of manufacturing and distribution businesses through the effective and efficient use and management of composite pallets. RM2’s customer-centric approach focuses on improving environmental efficiencies in the customer supply chain. RM2 is committed to reducing the emissions intensity of producing the RM2 BLOCKPal pallet. RM2 is proud to join the American Business Act On Climate Pledge and is dedicated to achieving outstanding environmental performance for itself and its customers. RM2 pledges to take a comprehensive approach in promoting sustainability, including:


		Reducing RM2 manufacturing GHG emissions intensity by 20% by 2025, compared with its 2015 baseline.

		Reducing pallet-related CO2 emissions by 21% when customers switch from a conventional pallet to the RM2 BLOCKPal.

		Through projected customer usage, the RM2 BLOCKPal will help in the reduction of 1.9 million tons of CO2 by 2025 and 4.4 million tons of CO2 by 2030.

		RM2 will continue to explore investment in technologies, products and processes that promote sustainability. It will continue to develop its tracking and logistics software which provide real time intelligence to monitor and optimize the efficient movement of any transit equipment.

		RM2 will continue its strategy to reduce the impact of its manufacturing and operations in the areas of water, waste and CO2 emissions. RM2’s strategy includes: (1) Continued reduction of impact in fabrication and assembly operations (2) Further adoption of new technologies with reduced environmental impact (3) Seeking suppliers with similar eco-efficient strategies (4) Publishing annual RM2 CSR & Sustainability Reports, starting in 2016.


ROYAL VENDING

	We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment. We put forth our pledges as follows:

	Royal Vending, Inc. pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20%, compared to a 2010 baseline, by 2016

		Deploy 60 KW renewable energy in 2015 covering approximately 40% of energy consumption.

		Improve energy efficiency across 20,000 square feet of company property by at least 20% by 2017


SALESFORCE.COM

	At Salesforce, we believe in leveraging the power of our people and our products to reduce the impact that we and our customers have on the planet. From how we deliver our products to our focus on renewable energy, we incorporate sustainability into all aspects of our business.

	Salesforce’s multi-tenant cloud platform makes it possible to use a remarkably small number of servers as efficiently as possible. In fact, our core platform is 98% more carbon efficient on average than on-premise software.

	Salesforce pledges to:


		Work towards powering 100% of our global operations with renewable energy.

		Continue pursuing LEED certification for our largest office spaces and other innovative green building initiatives.

		Leverage our people, technology and resources to help environmental nonprofits around the world.


SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC

	At Schneider Electric we believe that energy and digital transitions provide new efficient solutions to shift in low carbon society and that access to energy is a basic human right.  We are committed to providing innovative solutions to address the energy paradox: balancing the planet’s carbon footprint with irrefutable human right to quality energy. Schneider Electric has delivered on its commitments to sustainability in the last four years with a series of actions for the company’s direct emissions and in the supply chain:


		Through the years, we have developed a solid portfolio of solutions on renewables, energy efficiency, and grid connections that facilitate energy transition

		Avoided 220,000 tons of CO2 in energy consumption, transportation and site emissions

		 Reduced water intensity of our most water intensive sites by 23 percent since 2011

		Increased the number of our products that are considered “Green Premium” and carry an ecolabel to 75 percent

		2.4 million underprivileged households equipped with energy solutions through Access to Energy program


	Because what is good for climate is good for economy, we recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment.  We put forth our pledges as follows:


		Achieve 10 percent energy savings by the end of 2017  by reducing the company’s energy intensity 

		120,000 tons of CO2 avoided through end-of-life products by the end of 2017

		75 percent of products in R&D to be designed as Green Premium, with an ecolabel, and 75 percent of product revenue to come from Green Premium by the end of 2017

		Zero waste to landfill in 100 industrial sites by the end of 2017

		50 million underprivileged people obtaining lighting and communication systems with low carbon solutions by 2025 through the Access to Energy program

		Invest  over $11 billion over 10 years on R&D in innovation in sustainability


SIEMENS USA

	We put forth our pledge as follows:


		Siemens pledges to cut our global carbon footprint by 50% by 2020 and to reduce our net carbon emissions to zero by 2030.


	To achieve this goal, we have identified key emission reduction levers that will contribute to cutting CO2-emissions from our own operations and enable Siemens to become CO2-neutral in the long term. 


Energy Efficiency. Invest nearly $110 million globally in energy efficiency measures for our major factories within the next three years, including measures at a significant number of our total 84 Siemens sites in the U.S. Measures will include investments in buildings and production processes and will result in sustainable annual savings of more than $20 million in energy costs.  In Charlotte, at our LEED Gold certified advanced gas turbine manufacturing facility, we were able to cut costs and emissions both during construction and during operation by building the plant on a footprint requiring 18 percent less area than traditional production sites.  We have already begun to transition to LED light fixtures at many of our facilities in the U.S., including Charlotte, Bartlesville, Beltsville and Sacramento. 

Distributed Energy Systems. Implement innovative solutions at Siemens sites, combining power generation with storage solutions and intelligent energy management technologies. Our facility in Sacramento is already powered by up to 80 percent solar energy.  In Charlotte, the generator office building has a solar array on-site combined with energy management software.

Company Car Fleet. Focus on global roll-out of best practice examples for Siemens’ car fleet around the world, including clear emissions-related requirements, a bonus/malus system to set incentives for low emission cars, the development of an E-mobility solution concept, and the promotion of alternatives to driving such as the use of public transit and telecommuting.

Electricity Purchasing. Change our power purchasing guidelines and move towards a significantly cleaner power mix with a strong focus on renewable energies. As part of this commitment, we will buy electricity produced by our own technologies at our customers’ facilities. The world is transitioning away from fossil fuels and inefficient power grids.  With this approach, we will support the transition of the energy system towards coordinated solutions that lead to fewer emissions, more efficient power generation and less consumption of natural resources.

Supporting Our Customers’ Emissions Efficiency. We will continue to support our customers in reducing energy costs and improving their CO2footprints with products and solutions from our Environmental Portfolio, which helped them save approximately 430 million metric tons of carbon dioxide in 2014.


SKYONIC CORPORATION 

	Skyonic Corporation pledges to:


		Directly capture 750,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions by 2025

		Reduce our consumption of coal fired electricity by 50%  by using wind energy by 2025

		Maintain 70+ local jobs on an annual basis creating a local economic impact of $650M by 2025

		Deploy next generation technology designed to reduce CO2 emissions by >1M t/yr by 2025

		Produce carbon negative bleach that can be used to provide millions of gallons of clean drinking water by 2025

		Develop International carbon capture-chemical manufacturing projects reducing CO2, SOx, NOx, Hg and PM2.5 emissions on a global basis


SONY USA 

	We have established a long-term global environmental plan, Road to Zero, which aims for a zero environmental footprint throughout the lifecycle of our products and business activities by 2050. Curbing climate change is one of four perspectives we focus.   We have reduced over 1.2 million tons of greenhouse gas emissions from Sony facilities in fiscal 2014 compared to fiscal 2000, which is equivalent to approximately 46% reduction.  We have participated in the EPA Green Partner Partnership program since 2009 and are currently listed on the Top 30 Tech and Telecom list for the purchase of renewable energy in the U.S. We were also able to reduce the estimated annual energy consumption per product by 30% in fiscal 2014 compared to fiscal 2008.

	Working toward Road to Zero environmental plan, Sony Corporation of America on behalf of the entire Sony Group pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions from our facilities by 5%, compared to fiscal 2015 baseline, by fiscal 2020 on a global basis

		Reduce the annual energy consumption of its products* by an average of 30%, compared to fiscal 2013 baseline, by fiscal 2020. Reach out to over a few hundred million people worldwide through Sony's Entertainment contents, by fiscal 2020 to raise awareness and inspire action on the issues of environmental sustainability.

		Use and/or purchase renewable energy equivalent to 300,000 tons of CO2 emission by fiscal 2020 on a global basis.

		Enhance engagement of entire value chain by requesting major manufacturing partners and component suppliers cooperate by monitoring their CO2 emissions, water usage and waste.  Additionally, we will call on the major manufacturing partners to reduce these levels targeting 1% reduction in GHG emission and water usage intensity** per year. 


	* AC powered devices which operate the main function with energy input from the main power source (main electricity grid).

	** Environmental impact relative to the gross sales of product supplied to Sony.

STAPLES

	Staples Inc. pledges to:


		Achieve ENERGY STAR® building certification for 50% of our U.S. facilities by 2020

		Reduce electrical intensity globally by 25% by 2020 from a 2010 baseline

		Reduce total carbon emissions by 50% by 2020 from a 2010 baseline


STARBUCKS

	We put forth our pledges as follows:


		Build all company-owned stores to achieve LEED certification – To date, Starbucks has certified 669 stores in 19 countries, more than any other company in the world.

		Reduce energy use in company-owned Starbucks stores by 25%, compared to a 2008 baseline

		Reduce water use in company-owned Starbucks stores by 25%, compared to a 2008 baseline

		Purchase renewable energy equivalent to 100% of the electricity used in our company-owned stores

		Commit to purchase 100% ethically sourced coffee, through our C.A.F.E. Practices guidelines that increases impact through more efficient use of fertilizers, by preventing deforestation, and by reducing water and energy used in coffee processing. In addition, through our open sourced agronomy support, Starbucks ethically sourced coffee  strengthens coffee farmers’ ability to support their families and communities through increased coffee quality, more yield per hectare, and greater resilience to the changing climate conditions in some of the most vulnerable communities in the world

		Commit to invest $50M by 2020 towards a Global Farmer Fund that promotes coffee supply chain resilience and enables investments in sustainable infrastructure through low interest loans

		Continue our commitment, as one of the founding members of the BICEP coalition in the U.S., to advocate for smart climate policy at the Federal and International levels.


SWITCH COMMUNICATIONS

	Switch pledges to:


		Power its data centers with 100 percent renewable energy by building renewable energy generation facilities.  The first such project is a 100-megawatt solar farm in the in Nevada expected to start construction this October.

		Switch will work on reduction of water use by partnering for new water technologies and by getting the new data center campus we are building in Reno to rely 100 percent on recycled water from municipalities and local water utilities in northern Nevada. 


SYMANTEC

	Symantec Corporation (NASDAQ: SYMC) is the global leader in cybersecurity. Operating one of the world’s largest cyber intelligence networks, we see more threats, and protect more customers from the next generation of attacks. We help companies, governments and individuals secure their most important data wherever it lives. 

	At Symantec, we believe that the transition to a low-carbon economy is important for sustainable economic growth. We believe that company action, in partnership with stakeholder collaboration, is key to both mitigating risk and finding opportunity during this transition. 

	Symantec pledges to:


		Play our part in realizing the GHG emissions reductions that climate scientists tell us are needed in order to avoid the worst effects of climate change.  We will set a science-based goal early in 2016 to guide our GHG emissions reduction efforts.

		Continue to lend our voice to those calling for a meaningful clean energy policy framework, including through our participation in the Business for Innovative Climate and Energy Policy (BICEP) project.

		Work with others, including our peers, customers, data center vendors and utilities, to leverage our collective knowledge and resources in addressing climate change. We will continue our collaboration with others in the technology sector to promote increased data center access to and use of renewable electricity through the BSR Future of Internet Power initiative.


SYNGENTA/QCCP

	Cellerate Ethanol Technology, a partnership between Quad County Corn Processor and Syngenta pledges to:


		Enable conventional dry grind ethanol plants in the US to produce 609 million gallons per year of cellulosic ethanol by 2025.

		Cellerate produced gallons achieve a >100% GHG reduction compared to gasoline (energy equivalent)


TARGET

	Since 2010, Target has reduced greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) by improving energy efficiency, investing in renewable energy, and lowering our overall hydrofluorocarbon impact. These programs have successfully reduced our GHG emissions by 9% since 2010 and eliminated 550,000 metric tons of CO2e across our building portfolio. Target has established the following goals to support our pledge:


		Model leadership in energy efficiency by achieving ENERGY STAR certification in 80% of our buildings by 2020. These efforts will eliminate 9,000 metric tons of GHG emissions from our stores. 

		10 percent reduction in energy intensity-per-square-foot by 2020 for our stores against a baseline of 2010. These efforts will eliminate 271,500 metric tons of GHG emissions from our stores. To support this pledge, Target joined the Indoor Lighting Campaign launched in 2015, led by the US Department of Energy Better Building Alliance.

		Dramatically increase renewable energy at Target by increasing the number of solar rooftop panels by over 2000% since 2010 to 500 stores and distribution centers by 2020. Solar panels generate approximately one-third of energy use per building.
		

				Expand investment in offsite renewable energy to complement onsite renewables. To facilitate this effort, Target is partnering with a group of stakeholders to encourage utilities to make renewables more widely available to customers.

				Drive implementation of hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) free refrigerants in our food distribution centers and stand-alone refrigerated display cases. Over the last two years, Target has opened two new food distribution centers that employ ammonia, an HFC-free refrigerant, which has resulted in an annual reduction of 900 metric tons of CO2e.

				Reduce water use by 10 percent per square foot by 2020 for our stores against a baseline of 2010. 

				Divert 70% of retail waste from landfill through reuse or recycle programs by 2020

				Engage additional vendors and product categories in our Clean by Design program. The program includes initiatives our supply chain can implement to reduce wastewater effluent, water use, energy and emissions around the world.




TESLA MOTORS

	The single founding mission of Tesla Motors is to accelerate the world’s transition to sustainable transport. Tesla’s advanced electric vehicles shift transportation fuel from petroleum to electricity and Tesla’s electric energy storage systems allow for the widespread development of renewable electricity generation. 

	In order to achieve Tesla’s mission to drive the world to sustainable transport, Tesla is committed to producing and distributing long-range, compelling electric vehicles with world-class leading performance and function.   

TRI-ALPHA ENERGY

	Tri Alpha Energy (TAE) is dedicated to developing clean fusion energy technology that can ultimately deliver sustainable, commercially competitive base load electricity. TAE’s unique approach would provide an electricity generation technology that is compact, aneutronic and carbon-free with a safe environmental profile. Fusion-powered electricity would offer a world-changing solution to impact climate change.

	TAE is committed to further developing clean fusion-powered electricity technology by:


		Continuing science and engineering work to develop and validate its fusion-based carbon-free technology. 

		Committing $50 million to cover hardware costs for its next fusion energy test machine.

		Working with utility and industrial partners to jointly develop a commercialization plan to license its technology.


TRI GLOBAL ENERGY

	Building on the 6,200 megawatts of wind power projects that are now under development, under construction or in operation, Tri Global Energy is investing in renewable power diversification with the addition of a solar division and the acquisition of a solar energy company.  Accordingly, we put forth our pledges as follows:


		Initiate development of an additional 600-900 megawatts of new utility-scale wind generation projects annually through 2018, not only in West Texas and Eastern New  Mexico where TGE’s 15 wind generation projects are located, but expanding our reach to locations across the U.S. Tri Global Energy is the leading developer of wind energy in Texas. 

		Transition more than 500 megawatts of additional wind capacity into the construction and operations phase annually through 2018 thus increasing renewable capacity available for grid integration and electricity usage.

		Install solar photovoltaic systems on 1,000 commercial and 8,000 residential roof-tops over the next five years for homeowners, non-profit groups and other entities replacing the energy output of carbon-intense plants. 


UNDERGROUND CONSTRUCTION CO., INC.

	Underground Construction Co., Inc. pledges to:


		Reduce our carbon footprint by 10% by 2020 through: 
		

				Increasing light truck fuel efficiency.

				Utilizing route rationalization.

				Implementing a “no idle” policy.



		Reduce water consumption by 25% by 2020 through: 
		

				Installing low-flow fixtures in all permanent facilities.

				Reducing landscape watering.

				Utilizing recycled water for all contraction activities.



		Reduce energy consumption by 10% by 2020 through:
		

				Regular cleaning and maintenance of all HVAC and lighting systems.

				Installing low-energy light fixtures and ballasts.




UNILEVER

	Unilever United States and our 8,000 employees are proud to manufacture iconic brands including Dove, Lipton, Ben & Jerrys, Vaseline and Hellmann’s at 13 plants across the United States.

	Urgent action is needed to combat climate change. As part of the Unilever Sustainable Living Plan launched in 2010, Unilever is committed to decoupling our growth from its environmental footprint. We are deepening our efforts to lower our GHG impact from sourcing and manufacturing, and through innovation and behavior change. We will use our scale, influence and resources to create transformational change.

	As of 2015, our progress includes:


		We have achieved 100% renewable electricity procurement for our US facilities through a long-term power purchase agreement with NRG, including the annual purchase of 90 megawatts of energy from a Texas wind farm. 

		We have achieved our target of zero nonhazardous waste to landfill across our US factory network. Waste prevention and recycling divert organic wastes from landfills, reducing the methane released when those materials decompose.

		In 2012 in the US, we reduced water abstraction per ton of production by 26% when compared to a 2008 baseline. Our Covington, Tennessee ice cream facility reduced annual water abstraction by 75% through process improvements while increasing the volume of ice cream produced.

		In 2012, our North American logistics operations delivered a 7.8% improvement in CO2 efficiency compared to our 2010 baseline.

		As of 2014, we have deployed 3761 HFC-free refrigeration cabinets in the United States using natural refrigerant technology.


	We put forth our pledges as follows:


		We have committed to achieving zero net deforestation associated with four commodities – palm oil, soy, paper and board, and beef – no later than 2020. This commitment also extends to our tea businesses and supply chains. 

		Globally, by 2020, CO2 emissions from electricity from our factories will be at or below 2008 levels despite significantly higher volumes. CO2 from energy in manufacturing has been reduced by 37% per ton of production respectively since 2008. This is just the latest step in a long journey, in fact, compared to 1995, this represents a 64% reduction in absolute terms. 

		We have reached 100% renewable energy procurement for our US facilities and we are committed to move to on-site and directed off-site sources for 100% of our US energy needs by 2020.

		We have joined the RE100 campaign, committing to 100% renewable electricity in our sites around the world, not just the US.  We’ve already achieved that in Europe.

		We will continue to invest and deploy innovative technologies like dry shampoo, which we estimate that compared to washing with heated water, reduces GHG emissions by around 90% per consumer use.


UNITED TECHNOLOGIES

	United Technologies believes a lower carbon future is needed for the health of the natural environment and for the health of the economy to mitigate the risks associated with a changing climate.

	To achieve a lower carbon future, United Technologies will:


		Continue the legacy established in 1988 of minimizing its environmental footprint with the current trajectory to reduce carbon emissions by 80 percent before 2050 to support the goals of the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change;

		Advance the environmental sustainability and energy efficiency technologies in its aerospace, food refrigeration and building products and systems to support sustainable urbanization across the world;

		Require our preferred suppliers to annually reduce their operational environmental impacts, including greenhouse gas emissions;

		Engage the global community to promote policies and initiatives that achieve energy efficiency and lower greenhouse gas emissions to ensure a sustainable future.


UPS

	In 2013, successful execution of our global greenhouse gas strategy at UPS enabled us to exceed a 10 percent reduction in carbon intensity three years ahead of our 2016 goal. In 2014, we achieved a 14.1 percent reduction in our carbon intensity versus a 2007 baseline as a result of successfully executing carbon reduction strategies in our ground and air fleet. 

	Accordingly, UPS pledges:


		To double our goal to a 20 percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020, as measured by our UPS Transportation Intensity Index, off a 2007 baseline. The Transportation Intensity Index normalizes our greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to business volume, for instance by reducing the amount of fuel required to travel a given distance or to carry a given amount of cargo or packages; covers 96 percent of our worldwide Scope 1 and Scope 2 CO2e emissions; and combines data from separate carbon intensity metrics associated with our business segments.

		To achieve by 2017 a cumulative billion miles of package or freight movement in our alternative fuel/technology truck fleet, which we expect will number over 7,700 trucks by the end of 2015.


	Our UPS plan includes:


		Network and mode optimization to minimize the miles traveled and energy consumed.

		Investments in fuel-saving technologies to reduce our dependency on petroleum-based fuels.

		Investments in alternative fuel vehicles to help offset the use of conventional petroleum fuels

		Energy conservation through facility design, operational practices, renewable energy, and retrofitting.


	Accurate, verified disclosure of global greenhouse gas emissions data per recognized standards.

VALLEY ELECTRIC ASSOCIATION, INC.; VALLEY ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION ASSOCIATION

	Valley Electric Association, Inc. (VEA) and its family of energy companies recognize the importance of addressing climate change through the development of sustainable energy projects and programs that effectively utilize the abundance of renewable resources in Nevada and California. VEA promotes initiatives to reduce climate change as part of the cooperative’s steadfast commitment to building a brighter future for the region and the nation as a whole. As a member-owned electric cooperative that provides service to approximately 45,000 people in Nevada and California, VEA pledges to:


		Facilitate the development of more than 200 megawatts of new renewable energy projects within our 6,800-square-mile service territory by 2025

		Complete a 15-megawatt community solar energy generation project in Pahrump, Nevada by July 2016, providing the output of the project to community members at a lower price than their current electric rates

		Support the introduction of additional renewable energy resources into the western energy markets, facilitating the development of 50 megawatts of advanced energy storage for implementation in the western grid by 2020

		Continue to operate one of the nation’s largest and most successful domestic solar water heating programs, providing significant energy savings to our member-owners while improving access to green technology

		Eliminate an additional 39.2 million pounds of carbon dioxide and displace 14.2 million kilowatt-hours of energy demand by 2025 through our Domestic Solar Water Heating Program

		Continue to work alongside our member-consumers through an innovative Ambassador Program to promote the development of community-focused renewable energy projects and programs

		Continue to invest in AgSCADA programs in partnership with our member-consumers to advance the efficient utilization of water and energy for sustained agricultural practices. Promotion and cross-applications of smart-grid technologies will be employed to advance consumer efficiencies.

		Expand the cooperative’s existing renewable energy portfolio of VEA-owned solar facilities and renewable power purchase agreements

		Design all future buildings to comply with LEED standards

		Install, own and operate an electric vehicle charging station in Beatty, Nevada to promote the use of electric vehicles as part of the Nevada Electric Highway initiative

		Pursue additional strategies to promote climate change initiatives as appropriate


VERIZON COMMUNICATIONS

	Verizon is working hard to create solutions that reduce our carbon footprint and help our organization run faster, cleaner and better. We also work to help our customers reduce their energy use and environmental impact, from recycling events to innovating our packaging to providing solutions that help customers cut their own energy use.

	Measuring carbon intensity allows us to assess how we are becoming more energy efficient even as our business expands. For more than a decade, we have focused on improving our overall energy efficiency to reduce both our costs and our environmental footprint. We pledge to reduce our carbon intensity by 50 percent over the 2009 baseline by 2020.


VF CORPORATION

	VF Corporation – a leading global apparel, footwear and accessories company with more than 30 iconic brands – is proud to sign the American Business Act on Climate Pledge alongside American leaders in government and the private sector, building upon our existing environmental commitments. We believe we have the responsibility to do our part to mitigate the impacts of climate change and preserve the health of our planet for future generations.  

	VF Pledges To:


		Use 100% renewable energy by 2025 at our owned and operated facilities;

		Develop science-based goals to support additional emission reductions. We are on track to meet our commitment to reduce absolute carbon emissions 5% by 2015 (vs. 2009 baseline)  while growing 40% in the same time period;

		Continue to invest in energy efficiency and improve energy productivity. Currently, 85% of our 1,480 retail stores use LED lighting. We will continue the construction and utilization of LEED-certified buildings globally; and,

Collaborate across government, business and civil society as a global advocate for smarter climate policy.


VOLVO GROUP NORTH AMERICA

	We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment.

	The Volvo Group is one of the world’s leading manufacturers of trucks, buses, construction equipment and marine and industrial engines.  In the United States Volvo Group employs 12,000 people and has nine manufacturing facilities in six states. 

	The Volvo Group’s vision is to be the leading provider of sustainable transport solutions. As part of this vision, we are committed to working toward a future of CO2-neutral transportation and production. Environmental sustainability has been one of Volvo Group’s core values since 1972.  We recognize that transportation is a significant source of greenhouse gas emissions and meaningful reductions are necessary to avert the most dramatic effects of climate change.

	In 2010, the Volvo Group joined the World Wildlife Fund’s (WWF) Climate Savers Program. We exceeded our targets during the first commitment period by reducing lifetime CO2-emissions from products by 50 Mton and from production by more than 20%.

	Volvo Group North America participates in the U.S. Department of Energy’s Better Buildings Better Plants Program, and by the end of 2014, was one of only 11 companies in the program to meet its goal early, reducing energy consumption in eight manufacturing facilities by 26.8 percent compared to a 2009 baseline.

	In addition to improving production and product efficiency, the Volvo Group supports the greater use of renewable energy.  We continue to research and develop vehicles using alternative fuels and in North America, we have begun using landfill gas and solar energy to power our manufacturing facilities.


		Today the Volvo Group is still the only automotive manufacturer in WWF’s Climate Savers program.  Through this program and others like it, the Volvo Group pledges to: 

		Reduce total lifetime CO2 emissions from products sold between 2015 and 2020, by a cumulative saving of at least 40 Mton, compared to 2013 models

		Improve energy efficiency in production, by executing energy-savings activities, reaching a level of 150GWh by 2020

		Reduce energy consumption by 25 percent in our North American facilities by 2025 compared to a 2014 baseline

		Reduce CO2 emissions per produced unit from Volvo Group freight transport by 20% by 2020

		Explore and pursue opportunities to expand the number of Volvo Group CO2-neutral production facilities around the world, including one in Asia

		Establish a City Mobility program with at least five cities to develop the most efficient public transportation solutions, including the use of plug-in hybrid and fully electric transit buses

		Fulfill our commitment under the U.S. Department of Energy’s SuperTruck program and continue research, development and demonstration of advanced technologies and alternative fuels to accelerate the realization of lower and ultimately zero carbon emissions throughout the transport and construction sectors


WALMART

	At Walmart, we believe climate change is an urgent and pressing challenge, and we must all do our part to reduce, avoid and mitigate the impact of rising greenhouse gas (GHG) levels.  We remain committed to our role in accelerating the transition to a sustainable future.

	In 2014, we operated with 9 percent less energy per square foot compared with our 2010 baseline and 26 percent of our electricity used was generated from renewable sources - keeping us on track toward our goal of being powered by 100 percent renewable energy. Additionally, we’ve reduced the GHG intensity of our operations (Scope 1 and 2) for eight consecutive years, we’re on track to hold our absolute emissions flat over this decade, even with our continued growth as a company, and working with our suppliers, we’re on track to exceed our 2015 goal of eliminating 20 million metric tons of GHG emissions from our supply chain.

	Walmart is committed to collaborating with suppliers, NGOs, governments and other corporate partners to continue to enhance the sustainability of our operations and product supply chains for people and the planet.

	Walmart puts forth our pledges as follows:


		Drive the production or procurement of 7 billion kilowatt hours (kWh) of renewable energy globally by Dec. 31, 2020 – an increase of more than 600 percent versus our 2010 baseline. 

		Double the number of on-site solar energy projects at our U.S. stores, Sam’s Clubs and distribution centers by 2020, compared with our 2013 baseline.

		Reduce the total kWh-per-square-foot energy intensity required to power our buildings around the world by 20 percent by 2020 versus our 2010 baseline.

		Gain increasing visibility into key metrics regarding yields, water usage and GHGs in our food supply chains by 2025. Walmart is now working with suppliers, representing approximately 70% of food sales, to report their yield, water and GHG footprints all the way back to the farm.

		Establish joint agricultural partnerships with 17 suppliers, cooperatives and service providers on 23 million acres of land in the U.S. and Canada, with the potential to reduce 11 million metric tons of GHG by 2020.


	Achieve zero net deforestation in product sourcing by 2020 as part of The Consumer Goods Forum.

THE WITTERN GROUP

	We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment. We put forth our pledges as follows:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions in our products by 45 %, compared to a 2005 baseline, by 2025

		Purchase energy from a renewable energy company by 2015.

		Improve energy efficiency across 350,000 square foot of company property by at least 40% by 2016

		Increase investment in low-carbon, climate-resilient, and green projects by $2 million by 2025

		Eliminate deforestation from the production of agricultural commodities by 2020, in alignment with the 2014 New York Declaration on Forests.

		Develop long-term business plans that align with the deep DE carbonization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C.

		Reduce water usage by 10% by 2020.


XEROX CORPORATION

	Xerox has a long-standing commitment to environmental sustainability.  In 2003, we made a public commitment to reduce Green House Gas (GHG) emissions by joining the U.S. EPA Climate Leaders program and launching an internal program known as Energy Challenge 2012; a ten-year initiative. We exceeded our initial expectations, set subsequent goals and ultimately cut energy consumption by 31% and GHG emissions by 42% - that’s 210,000 tons of carbon dioxide equivalents (CO2e).

	Building on our strategic focus areas to reduce energy use and protect the climate; preserve the world’s forests and biodiversity; preserve clean air and water; and prevent and manage waste,

	XEROX CORPORATION pledges to:


		Reduce GHG emissions and energy consumption 20% by Y2020, from a Y2012 baseline, a science-based target commitment made in conjunction with the Carbon Disclosure Project’s Road to Paris initiative;

		Achieve 20% renewable usage by Y2020 with a goal of reaching 100% by 2050;

		Provide our customers, from the transportation sector to managed print services, with enhanced opportunities to reduce their environmental footprint; and

		Launch 100% of eligible new products in conformance with current applicable ENERGY STAR® specifications.


	Some of the projects Xerox is currently engaged in include:


		Teaming with the University of Michigan and other companies to create “MCity” – a 32-acre simulated urban environment to enable mobility developers to test the capabilities of connected and automated vehicles and systems;


	Combining a number of transportation solutions to enhance urban mobility, such as “Cloud Park,” which uses cameras and computers to direct drivers to open parking spots; the Merge® smart parking system, which uses occupancy data from meters and sensors to vary pricing and hence availability; and vehicle passenger detection to facilitate wide use of HOV/HOT lanes. The result is increasing traffic flow and decreasing time spent searching for a parking place, allowing for reduced fuel usage and improved air quality.


		Developing the Xerox Print Awareness Tool®, which provides end-users with graphical displays of their print usage as well as “eco-tips” to enhance sustainability awareness and choices.

		Continuing to refine and expand the use of our proprietary Emulsion Aggregation (EA) Toner, which utilizes ultra-low-melt technology to allow customers to photocopy with more sustainable materials, utilize less electricity and reduce their GHG emissions in comparison to conventional toner.


XYLEM

	Climate change will exacerbate the water challenges that lie at the heart of Xylem’s work. In response, we are developing mitigation and adaptation solutions that will improve the efficiency of the water sector and build resilience to the water-related challenges associated with climate change. We have also set ambitious operational targets for ourselves related to climate change. We pledge to do the following between now and 2020:

	Our operations:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions intensity from Xylem facilities by 20% by 2020 compared to our 2014 baseline;

		Reduce waste sent to landfill by 20% by 2020 compared to our 2014 baseline;

		Reduce Xylem’s water use by 25% by 2020 compared to our 2014 baseline;

		Invest in energy-efficiency retrofits – such as energy-efficient equipment – for our manufacturing facilities.


	Our products:


		Continue investments in R&D to develop water technologies that are energy-efficient, reliable and help customers build climate resilience;

		Introduce new products such as highly-efficient water technologies, pumps, and treatment solutions that use less energy and reduce lifecycle costs, including integration of renewable energy into key water technologies;

		Continue investing in development of low-cost water technologies for communities in developing economies.


	Our stakeholder engagement:


		Develop and promote research focused on understanding how the water sector can support climate change monitoring, mitigation and adaptation;

		Continue advocating for private sector action in curbing climate change through partnering with organizations such as the Stockholm International Water Institute, Carbon Disclosure Project, CERES, and the UN Global Compact. 

