
	Prescription drug abuse and heroin use have taken a heartbreaking toll on too many Americans and their families, while straining law enforcement and treatment programs. Today, the President will travel to West Virginia to hear directly from individuals and families affected by this epidemic and the health care professionals, law enforcement officers, and community leaders working to prevent addiction and respond to its aftermath. 

	As part of today’s event, the President will announce federal, state, local and private sector efforts aimed at addressing the prescription drug abuse and heroin epidemic. These include commitments by more than 40 provider groups – representing doctors, dentists, advanced practice registered nurses, physician assistants, physical therapists and educators -- that more than 540,000 health care providers will complete opioid prescriber training in the next two years. In addition, CBS, ABC, the New York Times, Google, the National Basketball Association, Major League Baseball and other companies will donate millions of dollars in media space for PSAs about the risks of prescription drug misuse produced by the Partnership for Drug-Free Kids.

	Today, the President issued a Memorandum to Federal Departments and Agencies directing two important steps to combat the prescription drug abuse and heroin epidemic:


Prescriber Training:  First, to help ensure that health care professionals who prescribe opioids are properly trained in opioid prescribing and to establish the Federal Government as a model, the Presidential Memorandum requires Federal Departments and Agencies to provide training on the prescribing of these medications to Federal health care professionals who prescribe controlled substances as part of their Federal responsibilities.

Improving Access to Treatment:  Second, to improve access to treatment for prescription drug abuse and heroin use, the Presidential Memorandum directs Federal Departments and Agencies that directly provide, contract to provide, reimburse for, or otherwise facilitate access to health benefits, to conduct a review to identify barriers to medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorders and develop action plans to address these barriers. 


	More Americans now die every year from drug overdoses than they do in motor vehicle crashes and the majority of those overdoses involve prescription medications. Health care providers wrote 259 million prescriptions for opioid pain medications in 2012 – enough for every American adult to have a bottle of pills.  Opioids are a class of prescription pain medications that includes hydrocodone, oxycodone, morphine, and methadone.  Heroin belongs to the same class of drugs, and four in five heroin users started out by misusing prescription opioid pain medications.

	In 2010, the President released his first National Drug Control Strategy, which emphasized the need for action to address opioid use disorders and overdose, while ensuring that individuals with pain receive safe, effective treatment.  Since then, the Administration has supported and expanded community-based efforts to prevent drug use, pursue ‘smart on crime’ approaches to drug enforcement, improve prescribing practices for pain medication, increase access to treatment, work to reduce overdose deaths, and support the millions of Americans in recovery.

	The most recent data show that the rate of overdoses involving prescription pain medication is leveling off, although it remains at an unacceptably high level. But the dramatic rise in heroin-related overdoses – which nearly doubled between 2011 and 2013 – shows the opioid crisis is far from over.

State, Local and Private Sector actions announced today include: 


		More than 40 provider groups – including physicians, dentists, advanced practice registered nurses, physician assistants, physical therapists and educators -- committed to:

		Have more than 540,000 health care providers complete opioid prescriber training in the next two years;

		Double the number of physicians certified to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder treatment, from 30,000 to 60,000 over the next three years;

		Double the number of providers that prescribe naloxone--a drug that can reverse an opioid overdose;

		Double the number of health care providers registered with their State Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs in the next two years; and

		Reach more than 4 million health care providers with awareness messaging on opioid abuse, appropriate prescribing practices, and actions providers can take to be a part of the solution in the next two years.


Groups include the American Medical Association, American Osteopathic Association, American Academy of Family Physicians, American College of Emergency Physicians, American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine, American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Academy of Pediatricians, American Society of Anesthesiologists, American Society of Addiction Medicine, American College of Osteopathic Internists, American Pain Society, American Academy of Addiction Psychiatry, American College of Physicians, American College of Osteopathic Emergency Physicians, American Academy of Pain Medicine, Interstate Postgraduate Medical Association, Physician’s Institute, American College of Osteopathic Surgeons, American College of Osteopathic Family Physicians, American Osteopathic Academy of Addiction Medicine, American Medical Student Association, American Medical Women's Association, Michigan Osteopathic Association, Ohio Osteopathic Association, Massachusetts Medical Society, Washington Osteopathic Medical Association, New Mexico Medical Society, California Academy of Family Physicians, Conjoint Committee on Continuing Education, Collaboration for REMS Education,  American Nurses Association, American Association of Nurse Practitioners, American Association of Nurse Anesthetists, Association of Women's Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses, American Psychiatric Nurses Association, American Association of Colleges of Nursing, National Association of Clinical Nurse Specialists, Nurse Practitioner Healthcare Foundation, American Academy of Physician Assistants, Physician Assistant Education Association, American Dental Association, American Physical Therapy Association, Association of American Medical Colleges, American Public Health Association, and Medscape.


CVS Health will allow CVS/pharmacy to dispense naloxone without patients needing to present an individual prescription pursuant to a standing order from a physician or collaborative practice agreement in an additional 20 states in 2016 and will launch a new drug abuse prevention program called Pharmacists Teach, where its pharmacists will make 2,500 presentations in high school health classes. Rite Aid will train 6,000 pharmacists on naloxone use over the next 12 months, and expand their naloxone dispensing program to additional states. The National Association of Chain Drug Stores will continue to educate their 125 chain member companies (40,000 pharmacies with 175,000 pharmacists) about opioid overdose and naloxone. The National Community Pharmacists Association, representing 23,000 pharmacies with over 62,000 pharmacists, will be distributing inserts to community pharmacists that highlight safe drug disposal and naloxone. The American Pharmacists Association, with an outreach capability to more than 250,000 individuals, will educate pharmacists, student pharmacists, and stakeholders through a new Resource Center on opioid use, misuse, and abuse. The American Society of Health-System Pharmacists will provide training and resources to 40,000 pharmacists, student pharmacists and pharmacy technicians. The National Association of Boards of Pharmacy will enhance access to prescription drug monitoring program data to thousands more physicians and pharmacists in Arizona, Delaware, Kentucky, and North Dakota in 2016. 

		The Fraternal Order of Police will provide their 330,000 members with an Opioid Overdose Resuscitation card to help identify and respond to overdoses. They will also educate thousands of their members through in-person and webinar overdose prevention trainings over the next year. The International Association of Chiefs of Police will host several educational sessions on the role of law enforcement in overdose prevention at its annual conference and will also hold an overdose prevention training webinar for its members.

		The National Association of Counties, National League of Cities, and United States Conference of Mayors, in conjunction with U.S. Communities Purchasing Alliance and Premier, Inc., will secure industry-leading discounts for tens of thousands of public agencies on naloxone and medications for treatment through their purchasing program that pools the purchasing power of state and local governments.

		To support the Partnership for Drug-Free Kids’ media campaign over the next year to increase the education and awareness of young people and their parents about the risks of prescription drug misuse, CBS Television Network, Turner Broadcasting, ABC owned and operated TV Stations, The New York Times, Google, Café Mom, and Meredith are committing more than $20 million in donated airtime and advertising space, and additional commitments are expected. The National Basketball Association and Major League Baseball will also run public service announcements across their respective media assets. The Partnership is also releasing an online toolkit to help local governments, law enforcement, and other community jurisdictions implement local drug disposal programs.

		Because prescription opioid misuse is a growing concern in high school and college athletics, The National Collegiate Athletic Association will educate more than 30,000 student-athletes about the dangers of prescription drug misuse, publish best practices to support student-athlete behavioral health, and sponsor the third Step UP! Bystander Intervention conference to equip educators to assist their students and student-athletes in intervening with peers on a host of behavioral concerns, including prescription drug misuse.  The National Association of High School Coaches will launch a drug prevention awareness campaign that will be shared with 320,000 head high school coaches and approximately 60,000 high school administrators. The American College of Sports Medicine will mobilize more than 500,000 sports medicine professionals in support of their “Better Move Campaign” to reduce the overuse and overdose of prescription pain medications. The National Athletic Trainers’ Association will share educational materials on opioid misuse prevention to 40,000 athletic trainers. The National Interscholastic Athletic Administrators Association will educate its membership of over 9,500 secondary school athletic administrators about substance use and its relationship to health and performance through its professional development program.

		The National PTA, which has more than four million members, will distribute prescription drug misuse awareness and educational materials to its members and promote them through its digital assets.

		Governors and local governments will be taking new actions to reduce opioid misuse and overdose throughout the next year. The National Association of Counties will mobilize more county leaders to implement smart strategies to reduce opioid misuse and overdose through their Safe and Secure Counties Initiative. The National Governors Association will launch a Developing Effective State Responses to the Heroin Epidemic project to help states identify and implement effective strategies for reducing heroin use and overdose. The United States Conference of Mayors, through its new Substance Abuse, Prevention, and Recovery Services Task Force, will identify effective prevention, intervention, treatment, recovery, and support services to promote to city mayors nationwide.

		The Harm Reduction Coalition will increase the number of naloxone doses provided through its network of partners from 130,000 in 2013 to 400,000 in 2016 and will work with 10 state prisons to provide training and naloxone kits to 4,000 pre-release inmates and their family members in 2016.  They will also convene a national summit on how syringe services programs are integrating broader prevention, counseling, care and treatment initiatives in response to the opioid epidemic.

The Elks National Drug Awareness Program will purchase and install at least 500 prescription drug disposal boxes in communities where heroin use and prescription drug abuse are most prevalent by the end of 2016. 

		The Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of America will train 2,000 youth leaders across the country about the dangers of prescription drug abuse; train 12,000 youth and adult leaders on effective prescription drug abuse prevention strategies; and hold 100 community forums to mobilize youth and adult leaders on this issue in 2016.

The Dr. Oz Show will launch a campaign leading up to a National Night of Conversation event on November 19 to encourage parents to talk with their children about prescription pain medications, heroin, and other drugs. Dr. Oz will promote this prevention initiative to millions of Americans through his show, other media appearances, and his nationally syndicated newspaper column.

		The Blue Cross Blue Shield Association is launching a national opioid use awareness campaign to help communities find local solutions for prevention and treatment.

The American Physical Therapy Association will reach more than 2.5 million members of the public and more than 100,000 of its members through awareness campaigns about the benefits of physical therapy as a potential alternative to prescription pain medications. The National Association of Social Workers will expand training for its 132,000 members on treatment of substance use disorders including opioid misuse, and will train school social workers to partner with parent and school organizations on prevention efforts. The American Public Health Association will provide continuing education credit training on prescription drug overdose to more than 1,500 health providers and distribute prescription drug misuse awareness materials to over 300,000 public health professionals.

		The American Association of Colleges of Nursing, the Association of American Medical Colleges, and the Physician Assistant Education Association will share professional guidance and best practices to better educate the next generation of health care workers on opioid misuse and substance use disorders.

WebMD and Medscape are committed to increasing awareness of opioid issues and informing and educating consumer and professional audiences. In December, WebMD and Medscape will produce a report on consumer and health care professionals’ awareness of issues surrounding opioid use. The report will be based on findings of a joint survey of consumers and health care professionals and explore issues ranging from prescribing practices and guidelines to the use and disposal of the drugs, as well as general levels of awareness around their misuse.


Additional Federal actions announced today include:


		The Drug Enforcement Administration announced that it will continue its National Prescription Drug Take-Back Day program events in the spring and fall of 2016.  As the President highlighted in a recent Weekly Address, Take-Back Day aims to provide a safe, convenient, and responsible means of disposing of unused prescription drugs, while educating the public about the dangers of misusing medications.

		The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) will undertake a review of how pain management is evaluated by patient satisfaction surveys used by hospitals and other health care providers, including review of how the questions these surveys use to assess pain management may relate to pain management practices and opioid prescribing.

		The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will invest $8.5 million on the development of tools and resources to help inform prescribers about appropriate opioid prescribing; track data on prescribing trends; research, develop, and evaluate clinical quality improvement measures and programs on opioid prescribing; and improve public understanding of the risks and benefits of opioid use.

HHS also launched HHS.gov/opioids as a one-stop federal resource with tools and information for families, health care providers, law enforcement, and other stakeholders on prescription drug abuse and heroin use prevention, treatment, and response.

U.S. Surgeon General Vivek Murthy is developing an education campaign for doctors, dentists and other health care professionals who prescribe opioid pain medications. Earlier this month, Dr. Murthy also announced that work has begun on the first-ever Surgeon General's Report on substance use, addiction and health scheduled for publication in 2016.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) will release an Information Bulletin to States by the end of the year on steps States can take through their Medicaid preferred drug lists (PDLs) and other utilization management mechanisms to reduce the risk of overdose.  This includes a recommendation that they consider removing methadone from their PDLs for pain management.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has found that the use of methadone in pain treatment is associated with a disproportionately high number of overdose deaths compared to other opioid pain relievers.  

		This fall, CMS is testing three new Medicare prescription drug plan measures designed to identify potential opioid overutilization, with the goal of proposing publicly reportable measures for Part D drug plans next year.  These measures are based on the work of the Pharmacy Quality Alliance.

The Department of Veterans Affairs will lead a research initiative to evaluate non-opioid alternative approaches to pain management. The Department of Defense (DoD) and VA are developing a standardized pain management curriculum for widespread use in education and training programs.

		The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and the Indian Health Service will provide BIA police officers and investigators the overdose reversal drug naloxone and training on its use.  In 2016, the BIA, through the United States Indian Police Academy, will provide training to all BIA and tribal police officer cadets in recognizing opioid use disorders and overdose symptoms.

		The White House will host a Champions of Change event this spring to highlight individuals in communities across the country who are leading the fight to respond to prescription drug abuse and heroin use.


Today’s actions build on the Administration’s commitment to confronting this epidemic:  

	In 2010, the President released his first National Drug Control Strategy, emphasizing the need for action to address opioid use disorders and overdose, while ensuring that individuals with pain receive safe, effective treatment.  The next year, the White House released its national Prescription Drug Abuse Prevention Plan to outline our goals for addressing prescription drug abuse and overdose.

	The President’s Fiscal Year 2016 budget includes $133 million in new investments aimed at addressing the opioid epidemic, including expanding state-level prescription drug overdose prevention strategies, medication-assisted treatment programs, and access to the overdose-reversal drug naloxone. 

	Examples of additional actions by the Administration to address the opioid epidemic include:

Community Prevention and Overdose Response


		In 2015, the CDC launched the Prescription Drug Overdose: Prevention for States Program, which provided $20 million to states to support strategies to improve prescribing practices and prevent opioid overdose deaths.

		Through the National Take Back Days to remove unused prescription drugs from the community, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) has collected more than 5.5 million pounds of medication and introduced several new ways to dispose of unused prescription drugs – including pre-paid return-mail packages.  DEA also finalized a new rule making it easier for communities to establish ongoing drug take-back programs.

		In 2012, the Department of Veterans Affairs established an Opioid Safety Initiative to enhance safe and effective pain care for veterans. VA medical centers have filled more than 6,500 naloxone kit prescriptions, and VA’s efforts to make opioid overdose kits available has resulted in at least 100 lives saved.

		With support from the Department of Justice (DOJ) and other funders, 49 states have established Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs to help prescribers identify potential opioid misuse issues.

		In 2015, HHS announced a targeted initiative to combat opioid related overdose, death, and dependence focused on increasing prescriber training, increasing the use of the overdose reversal drug naloxone, and expanding the use of medication-assisted treatment.

		The federal government is expanding access to prescription drug monitoring program data throughout federal agencies. DoD’s Pharmacy Data Transaction Service automatically screens all new medication orders against a patient’s computerized medication history and permits DoD to monitor for concerning drug usage patterns. DoD’s Polypharmacy Medication Analysis Reporting is being used to identify high risk active duty service members based on their medication use and emergency department encounters. The Indian Health Service has successfully piloted integrating this data into their electronic systems, and a pilot to integrate data into the workflow of physicians in the DoD health system is slated to launch in 2016.

		The DOJ Bureau of Justice Assistance released a Law Enforcement Naloxone Toolkit to support law enforcement agencies in establishing naloxone programs. The toolkit has been downloaded more than 2,200 times in the last year.

		DOD is ensuring that opioid overdose reversal kits and training are available to every first responder on military bases or other areas under its control.

		The Office of National Drug Control Policy supports local Drug Free Communities coalitions to reduce youth substance use through evidence-based prevention.  In recent years, hundreds of these coalitions have specifically focused on prescription drug misuse issues in their areas.


Treatment


		Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, substance use disorder and mental health services are essential health benefits that are required to be covered by health plans in the Health Insurance Marketplace.

		New rules finalized by this Administration ensure that covered mental health and substance use disorder benefits are comparable to medical and surgical benefits.

		HHS is investing up to $100 million in Affordable Care Act funding to expand substance use disorder treatment, with a focus on medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorders, in community health centers across the country.

		HHS Secretary Burwell announced that the Department will engage in rulemaking related to the prescribing of buprenorphine-containing products approved by the FDA for treatment of opioid dependence to expand access to medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorders.  HHS will take a strategic approach in order to minimize diversion and ensure evidence-based treatment.

		The CDC has been working over the last year with clinical experts and other stakeholders to develop new, peer-reviewed guidelines on prescribing opioids for chronic pain outside end of life settings to help improve the way opioids are prescribed and ensure patients have access to safer, more effective chronic pain treatment, while reducing opioid misuse and overdose.

		HHS recently awarded $11 million in new grants to States to support medication-assisted treatment and $1.8 million to help rural communities purchase naloxone and train first responders in its use.


Enforcement and Supply Reduction


		The White House Office of National Drug Control Policy's High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas program is funding an unprecedented network of public health and law enforcement partnerships to address the heroin threat across 15 states.

		In October of 2015, DOJ’s Office of Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS Office) awarded $6 million through the Anti-Heroin Task Force Program, which is designed to advance public safety by providing funds to investigate illicit activities related to the distribution of heroin or unlawful distribution of prescriptive opioids, or unlawful heroin and prescription opioid traffickers through statewide collaboration.

		DOJ’s enforcement efforts include targeting the illegal opioid supply chain, thwarting doctor-shopping attempts, and disrupting so-called “pill mills.”

		DOJ has cracked down on those who use the Internet to buy and sell controlled substances.  

		DEA agents and investigators are integrating with other federal, state, and local law enforcement officers in 66 Tactical Diversion Squads stationed across 41 states, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia.  Outcomes of this effort include the largest pharmaceutical-related takedown in the DEA’s history in an operation that resulted in 280 arrests.

		Since 2007, through the Merida Initiative, the Department of State has been working with the Government of Mexico to help build the capacity of Mexico’s law enforcement and justice sector institutions to disrupt drug trafficking organizations and to stop the flow of illicit drugs including heroin from Mexico to the United States. 


“Twenty-first century businesses will rely on American science and technology, research and development…I want Americans to win the race for the kinds of discoveries that unleash new jobs.”


		President Obama, 2015 State of the Union Address


	Today, the Administration is unveiling an updated Strategy for American Innovation. The Strategy, first issued in 2009, provides an overview of Administration efforts to ensure America continues to lead as the world’s most innovative economy, to develop the industries of the future, and to harness innovation to help address our Nation’s most important challenges.

	The Strategy also makes the case for the key innovation investments to advance the important emerging technologies it identifies, which are proposed in the President’s 2016 Budget and are critical for ensuring that the United States remains an innovation superpower.

The Strategy being released today has three core components that focus on:


		The importance of investing in research and development (R&D) and the other building blocks of long-term economic growth, instead of locking in harmful sequestration cuts.

		Strategic areas from advanced vehicles to precision medicine where focused effort can advance national priorities and help create shared prosperity.

		New efforts to make the Federal government more innovative to improve performance and create a better environment for innovation by the private sector and civil society.


	The Strategy’s release coincides with “Back to the Future” Day—an unofficial celebration of the date to which Marty McFly traveled 30 years into the future in the movie Back to the Future Part II. The day offers a useful lens to examine how much innovation has changed the United States and the world over the past three decades and an opportunity to consider the innovations that could shape our world over the next three decades.

Background

	For an advanced economy such as the United States, innovation is a wellspring of economic growth and a powerful tool for addressing our most pressing challenges as a nation – such as enabling more Americans to lead longer, healthier lives, and accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy. In fact, from 1948-2012 over half of the total increase in U.S. productivity growth, a key driver of economic growth, came from innovation and technological change.

	That’s why President Obama issued the nation’s first-ever innovation strategy in 2009, updated it in 2011, and is issuing a final update today. American scientists, engineers, and entrepreneurs invented the microchip, created the Internet, invented the smartphone, started the revolution in biotechnology, and sent astronauts to the Moon. And last year, U.S. businesses created jobs faster than at any time since the 1990s.  Now is the time to renew our commitment to innovation to drive economic growth and shared prosperity for decades to come with a strategy to elevate and coordinate our investments and ensure we lead the world in the next generation of cutting-edge innovations. 

Investing in R&D and other Building Blocks of Long-Term Economic Growth

	The Strategy showcases why we cannot afford to be complacent or let the harmful impacts of sequester undermine the investments that have made us an innovation superpower, given that our economic competitors are dramatically increasing their commitment to R&D investments.

	A thriving American innovation ecosystem requires not only visionary and risk-taking entrepreneurs and companies, but also the foundational “building blocks” of innovation in which the Federal government invests. Federally-funded research at universities and Federal laboratories creates a stream of new insights and scientific and technological breakthroughs, some of which will ultimately be commercialized by the private sector. At the same time, these investments prepare the next generation of scientists and engineers. Federal investments also underpin the physical and digital infrastructure that is not only fundamental to economic activity but also enables new products and business models.

	Federal investments in R&D are critical to keeping America on the cutting edge of the innovation economy.  If the President’s 2016 Budget request for $146 billion in R&D is ignored and harmful sequestration cuts are imposed, the American people could be denied important research advances, such as lifesaving biomedical breakthroughs, a leading advanced manufacturing sector, and cleaner energy.

	In addition, creating the right policy and regulatory environment is essential to stimulating private-sector investment, whether it is providing patent protection for life-saving drugs, maintaining a free and open Internet, enforcing our antitrust laws, governing the commercial introduction of emerging technologies, or making it easier for startups and rapidly growing firms to raise capital.  The Administration is also committed to sustaining a trade agenda that has significantly boosted exports, eliminated market-access barriers, and enhanced strong and balanced intellectual property protection. Although the government’s role of creating the right “rules of the road” and investing in continued long-term economic growth is less visible than that of the entrepreneur, it is critical to America’s economic future.

A Spotlight on Nine Areas of Strategic Opportunity 

	As part of the strategy, the Administration is highlighting new areas of strategic opportunity where focused effort can advance national priorities and help create shared prosperity, including the following nine highlights:


Advanced Manufacturing: American manufacturing, which supplies nearly three-quarters of all U.S. private-sector research and development, is central to American innovation, both to discoveries being made today and our ability to drive productivity and job growth in the future. The President and his Administration have put forward a comprehensive agenda to strengthen U.S. manufacturing, including restoring the nation’s lead at the cutting-edge of manufacturing innovation by launching a National Network for Manufacturing Innovation, reinvesting in supply chain innovation, supporting the scale-up of technology-intensive manufacturing startups, and more.

Precision Medicine: Most medical treatments have been designed for the “average patient.” As a result of this “one-size-fits-all” approach, treatments can be very successful for some patients but not for others. Precision medicine gives clinicians tools to better understand the complex mechanisms underlying a patient’s health, disease, or condition, and to better predict which treatments will be most effective – but the potential for precision medicine to improve care and speed the development of new treatments has only just begun to be tapped. The 2016 Budget proposes $215 million to launch the Precision Medicine Initiative, which will leverage advances in genomics, emerging methods for managing and analyzing large data sets, and health information technology while protecting privacy.

BRAIN Initiative: The social and economic burden of neurological disorders and diseases is overwhelming, and developing new treatments is critical to addressing these burdens. For example, the current cost of caring for the five million Americans with Alzheimer’s disease is over $200 billion per year, including $150 billion from Medicare and Medicaid. The BRAIN Initiative has the potential to do for neuroscience what the Human Genome Project did for genomics by enabling a dynamic understanding of brain function. A deepened knowledge of how brains work will help scientists and doctors diagnose and treat diseases more incisively, educate children more effectively, and develop novel technologies and devices to help alleviate the burdens of illness and injury. The President’s 2016 Budget includes over $300 million to support the BRAIN Initiative.

Advanced Vehicles: Breakthrough developments in sensing, computing, and data science have brought vehicle-to-vehicle communication and cutting-edge autonomous technology safety features into commercial deployment, while vehicles approaching full autonomy—self-driving cars—are already being tested on public roads.  Accelerating the development and deployment of these advanced vehicle technologies could save thousands of lives annually by applying the split-second reaction times and precision decision-making of machine intelligence to the more than 90 percent of crashes involving human error. The President’s 2016 Budget calls for doubling Federal investments in autonomous vehicle technology research to develop performance and safety standards for autonomous, connected, and self-driving vehicles on public roads and to comprehensively pilot these technologies in cities, on highways, and in commercial environments.

Smart Cities: An emerging community of civic leaders, data scientists, technologists, and companies are joining forces to build “Smart Cities”—communities that are building an infrastructure to continuously improve the collection, aggregation, and use of data to improve the life of their residents—by harnessing the growing data revolution, low-cost sensors, and research collaborations, and doing so securely to protect safety and privacy. For example, by coordinating adjacent traffic signals to decrease local traffic, a pilot project in Pittsburgh has reduced commuting travel times by nearly 25 percent on average. The Administration’s new Smart Cities Initiative invests over $160 million in Federal research and leverages more than 20 cities participating in new multi-city collaborations to help local communities tackle key challenges such as reducing traffic congestion, fighting crime, fostering economic growth, managing the effects of a changing climate, and improving the delivery of city services. The President’s 2016 Budget calls for over $30 million in new research and deployment investments for smart cities.

Clean Energy and Energy Efficient Technologies: Over the past six years, the amount of electricity generated from wind power has tripled and from solar power has increased by more than 20-fold. The Administration is determined to sustain this momentum through continuing to build on its progress in developing and deploying clean electricity technologies, catalyzing independent commitments by major foundations, institutional investors, and other long-term investors to fund climate-change solutions, make energy go further through improved energy efficiency, and work to reduce carbon pollution while helping to improve America’s energy security.

Educational Technology: Currently, a large gap remains between the relatively modest impact that technology has had on education, particularly in grades K-12, and the transformative impact that technology has had on other parts of our lives. The President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology estimates that less than two-tenths of one percent of overall education spending goes to R&D, unlike knowledge-intensive sectors like biotechnology which allocate 15-20 percent of revenue to R&D. But that is poised to change. The technological conditions are ripe for the development of advanced educational technologies that can transform teaching and learning. In just the past five years, DARPA has showed that Navy IT students trained with a DARPA-developed digital tutor can outperform 98 percent of the students trained with a traditional instructor. Through the President’s ConnectED Initiative, the United States is now on the path to give 99 percent of students access to high-speed broadband by 2018. And the 2016 Budget includes $50 million for the creation of an Advanced Research Projects Agency for Education (ARPA-ED) to pursue breakthroughs in learning technology.

Space: President Obama has emphasized the importance of investing in space technology and a long-term goal in space of venturing “out into the solar system, not just to visit but to stay,” as he articulated in the 2015 State of the Union Address. In addition to core investments to develop a U.S. commercial crew space transportation capability by 2017, NASA is increasing its support for longer-term research projects with ambitious goals, such as protecting astronauts from radiation in space, developing advanced propulsion systems, and allowing humans to “live off the land” by producing fuel, oxygen, and water on other planets.  These investments will create the foundations for a space-faring civilization and a future human mission to Mars. The 2016 Budget proposes $1.2 billion for NASA’s Commercial Spaceflight program, and $725 million for NASA’s Space Technology Mission Directorate.

New Frontiers in Computing: Advances in high-performance computing (HPC) have the ability to improve public services, grow the economy, improve the health and safety of our community, and promote scientific discovery. Coordinated new investments are needed to overcome key challenges, including: the end of Moore’s Law as a predictor of increases in system performance, the rise of extremely large data sets and attendant computational challenges, and the coming end of a two-decade period of stability in HPC architecture. In July 2015, the President created a National Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI) by Executive Order to meet these challenges and create a cohesive, multi-agency strategic vision and Federal investment strategy for HPC. This strategy will spur the creation and deployment of computing technology at the leading edge, helping to advance Administration priorities for economic competitiveness, scientific discovery, and national security.


	In addition to these nine priority areas, the Administration also believes that we must continue to invest in a pipeline of emerging “general-purpose technologies” that will serve as a source of future strategic initiatives. These technologies are innovations that have a pervasive impact on our economy and our society. Past examples include the steam engine, electricity, interchangeable parts, the transistor, and the Internet. The Administration is committed to spurring the development of the next generation of general-purpose technologies, such as nanotechnology, robotics and autonomous systems, advanced materials, and engineering biology.

An Increased Focus on Increasing the Innovation Capacity of Government

	Building on the President’s efforts to continue to increase innovative solutions and approaches, the Strategy also includes a new chapter on steps the Administration has taken and will take to make the Federal government even more innovative by harnessing new approaches for institutional change. Continued institutional innovation and experimentation are needed both to improve the performance of the Federal government and to create a better environment for innovation by the private sector and civil society. These public-sector innovations include tapping the ingenuity of the American people to solve problems using incentive prizes and using a “test-validate-scale” approach to find and fund what works.

	The Administration is building the capacity for the broader adoption and institutionalization of these and other innovations. The Administration’s Digital Service delivery teams are making access to government services simpler and more intuitive, while also working with agencies to modernize IT development and customer service standards. A network of Federal agency innovation labs is fostering a culture of innovation by empowering and equipping Federal employees to deliver better results for the American people.  And a new Innovation Toolkit will give Federal employees the information they need to try new approaches to solve problems, improve the core operations of government, and promote innovation. 
