
	10:54 A.M. CEST

	 

	 

	     THE PRESIDENT:  Gruess gott!  (Applause.)  It is wonderful to be back in Germany for my fourth visit as President.  And to my great friend and partner, Chancellor Merkel; to Mayor Schwarzenberger and the people of Krün and Cree; to the people of Germany -- thank you for welcoming me here today and for the incredible hospitality and the incredible beauty of this place.  (Applause.)  

	 

	I want to thank everybody for this wonderful visit to this beautiful village.  I know it's a lot of hard work when I come to town.  (Laughter.)  That was, without question, the best alphorn performance I’ve ever heard.  I have to admit that I forgot to bring my lederhosen.  But I'm going to see if I can buy some while I'm here.  (Laughter and applause.) 

	 

	Now, I must admit that when I first learned that Angela was going to host the G7 in Bavaria, I was hoping that it would fall during Oktoberfest.  But, then again, there’s never a bad day for a beer and a weisswurst.  (Laughter.)  And I can’t think of a better place to come to celebrate the enduring friendship between the German and American people.  (Applause.)  

	 

	I come here grateful for the history that we share.  And so much of America -- including my hometown of Chicago -- would not be the same without the contributions of so many German immigrants, including from Bavaria.  Over the years, Bavaria and Germany have returned the favor by welcoming countless Americans -- including generations of our servicemembers and students from the George Marshall Center.  And on behalf of the American people, I want to thank you for your gracious hospitality.  (Applause.)  

	 

	So over the next two days in Schloss Elmau, we’re going to discuss our shared future -- a global economy that creates jobs and opportunity; maintaining a strong and prosperous European Union; forging new trade partnerships across the Atlantic; standing up to Russian aggression in Ukraine; combating threats from violent extremism to climate change.  And on all these issues, we are very grateful for the partnership and leadership of your Chancellor, Angela Merkel.  (Applause.)  

	 

	These are all difficult challenges.  But part of what gives me hope is the example of Germany.  This year marks 70 years since the end of World War II -- and decades of a great NATO Alliance.  It marks 25 years since the unification of Germany that inspired the world.  The fact that all of us are here together today is proof that conflicts can end and great progress is possible.

	 

	So this morning, as we celebrate one of the strongest alliances the world has ever known, my message to the German people is simple:  We are so grateful for your friendship, for your leadership.  We stand together as inseparable allies -- in Europe and around the world.  (Applause.)

	 

	My only final request for Angela is that, on such a beautiful day, instead of being inside, we should have all our summit meetings in this incredible village center -- and drink beer.  (Laughter.)  But I think we'll have to negotiate with the security people.  (Laughter.)        

	 

	Vielen dank.  (Applause.)

	 

	                       END               11:03 A.M. CEST 

	  

	6:36 P.M. CEST

	 

	PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, it is wonderful to be back with my good friend and partner, David Cameron.  I want to congratulate him, as I did over the phone, on his resounding election victory.  And I look forward to working with him on a whole host of issues in the coming year.

	 

	This is going to give us an opportunity to discuss a number of particular challenges that require U.S. and United Kingdom leadership.  We’ll be talking about Russia and Ukraine, and the importance of us maintaining the sanctions regime to put pressure on Russian and separatist forces to implement fully the Minsk agreement.  We think that there can be a peaceful, diplomatic resolution to this problem, but it’s going to require that Europe, the United States and the Transatlantic Partnership, as well as the world, stay vigilant and stay focused on the importance of upholding the principles of territorial integrity and sovereignty.

	 

	We’ll have an opportunity to discuss the effort against ISIL and the situation in Iraq and Syria, and assess what’s working, what’s not, and how we can continue to make progress there in dismantling the infrastructure that ISIL has built, and in promoting the kinds of political inclusion in Iraq and ultimately in Syria that are going to be necessary for a long-term solution.

	 

	We’ll also have a chance to talk about hotspots like Libya and Nigeria, where, obviously, terrorism has gotten a foothold.  And more affirmatively, we’re going to have an opportunity to continue the discussion bilaterally that we have been having with the other G7 members around issues like trade and climate change, and the importance of U.S. and British leadership on those issues.

	 

	So I am very much looking forward to this conversation.  We have no closer partner around the globe on a whole host of critical issues.  I would note that one of the great values of having the United Kingdom in the European Union is its leadership and strength on a whole host of global challenges.  And so we very much are looking forward to the United Kingdom staying a part of the European Union because we think that its influence is positive not just for Europe, but also for the world.

	 

	But, David, again, congratulations.  Looking forward to continued work.

	 

	PRIME MINISTER CAMERON:  Well, thank you very much.  And it’s good to be back with my friend and close partner, Barack Obama, and working together over the coming years. 

	 

	As you said, Barack, there are so many issues to discuss at this meeting and bilaterally with our very close partnership, the partnership between Britain and the United States, that special relationship.  But they all really come down to two words:  prosperity and security -- what we want for our people back at home, which is the chance of a job, and also the chance to have greater security.

	 

	And whether we’re discussing the situation in the Ukraine, the need to fight Islamic extremist terrorism, particularly in Iraq and Syria, but elsewhere around the world, it’s about keeping people safe back at home, where the cooperation between our security and intelligence services and our military is as close as it’s ever been and as effective as it’s ever been.

	 

	We’ve also got a lot of issues to discuss that really will determine whether we can have successful, strong economies, like the need for these trade deals we were talking about earlier, and also the deal on climate change, which is going to be important for our future prosperity and security.

	 

	So a lot of issues to discuss tonight, and it’s great to be back together with you addressing them in this bilateral meeting as well as in the bigger G7.  So thank you very much.

	 

	PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Thank you, everybody. 

	 

	                        END                 6:41 P.M. CEST
