
ASEAN is a significant trade and investment partner for the United States.  Collectively, the 10 countries of ASEAN represent the United States’ fourth-largest goods trading partner, ahead of Japan, with $216 billion in two-way goods trade in 2014.  In 2014, U.S. goods exports to ASEAN were $79 billion, making ASEAN the United States’ fourth largest export market.  U.S. goods exports to ASEAN support over 370,000 American jobs.  The major U.S. exports to the region are machinery, aircraft, optical and medical instruments, and mineral fuel and oil.  The United States also exported over $11 billion in agricultural products to ASEAN countries last year.  ASEAN is an important and growing services market for U.S. companies.  The United States exported $23 billion in services to the ASEAN region in 2014, and recorded a $7 billion surplus in services trade with ASEAN.  

Strong Investment Reflects U.S.-ASEAN Supply Chains

	The stock of U.S. foreign direct investment in the ASEAN countries totaled $226 billion in 2014, up more than 13 percent over the previous year, and exceeds the foreign direct investment in ASEAN from Japan, Korea, and China combined.  Foreign direct investment stock from the ASEAN countries in the United States totaled over $20 billion in 2014.  

Growing U.S.-ASEAN Economic Engagement

	Under the U.S.-ASEAN Trade and Investment Framework Arrangement (TIFA), the Expanded Economic Engagement Initiative (E3), and the ASEAN Connectivity through Trade and Investment (ACTI) program, we are expanding trade and investment ties between the United States and ASEAN, creating business opportunities and new jobs for both parties. 

	Building on existing efforts, we and ASEAN continue to work together on standards, trade facilitation -- including the implementation of the ASEAN Single Window (ASW), connectivity and infrastructure, and increasing the capacity of small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).  The United States has trained leaders of SMEs in ASEAN member states through a flagship program between the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) and the U.S.-ASEAN Business Council, benefitting over 3,500 SME owners.  

	This year, we launched a series of workshops under the U.S.-ASEAN Trade and Environment Dialogue to promote mutually supportive policies.  The first workshop on illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing was organized earlier this month in Malaysia.  We are planning to organize two more workshops next year on illegal logging and wildlife trafficking.  The United States will also host ASEAN Economic Ministers in 2016 to highlight U.S. innovation, technology and best practices.

	In addition, the United States and ASEAN are deepening institutional ties through the launch of annual consultations on issues of mutual and strategic interest, such as information communications technology and aviation, while augmenting existing consultations and cooperative work plans in energy. 

Today, President Obama led the U.S. delegation to the U.S.–ASEAN Summit in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.  The United States and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) have been partners for nearly 40 years, working together on shared goals of stability, prosperity, and peace in Southeast Asia.  The decision today to elevate this relationship to a strategic partnership marks a new era of even stronger cooperation.  The United States is committed to this partnership for the long run and continues to deepen and broaden engagement with ASEAN and its individual member states.  The ASEAN-U.S. Plan of Action 2016–2020, which the leaders endorsed at the Summit, is a symbol of this mutual commitment.  The United States supports ASEAN’s central role in many of the region’s key institutions and works closely with ASEAN to strengthen Asia’s regional architecture.

	The United States and ASEAN have jointly undertaken a variety of activities and programs, including support for the ASEAN Economic Community and programs to strengthen people-to-people ties, like the Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative.  U.S.-ASEAN cooperation is also supporting sustainable growth and a strengthened rules-based system so that countries can work together to address regional challenges like climate change, human trafficking, and maritime security. 

	The United States has five priority areas for engagement with ASEAN across its economic, political, and socio-cultural pillars.

Increasing Economic Cooperation

	The United States and ASEAN traded $254 billion in two-way goods and services, and U.S. FDI in Southeast Asia totaled $226 billion (stock) in 2014, the largest of any nation.  Under the U.S.-ASEAN Trade and Investment Framework Agreement and the Expanded Economic Engagement Initiative, we are expanding these ties between the United States and ASEAN and creating business opportunities and new jobs for both parties.  This year, we launched a series of workshops under the U.S.-ASEAN Trade and Environment Dialogue to promote mutually supportive policies.  

	The United States is working with ASEAN Member States to realize the vision of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC), as part of the larger ASEAN Community.  The AEC will expand the free movement of goods, services, labor, and capital among ASEAN member states.  The United States is committed to supporting this effort by providing assistance in areas including trade facilitation, standards harmonization, increasing the capacity of small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in ASEAN member states, and expanding a vibrant internet economy. 

	The United States has supported the implementation of the ASEAN Single Window, a customs facilitation tool, and we have trained the leaders of SMEs through a flagship partnership between USAID and the U.S.–ASEAN Business Council. To date, more than 3,500 SME owners have participated in this program.  This year, we also launched two new dialogues on information communications technology, with a particular focus on promoting internet connectivity and e-commerce, and aviation.  We are launching a Youth Innovation Challenge to identify cutting-edge solutions to cross-border ASEAN priorities and connect youth innovators with U.S. private sector networks.  The United States and ASEAN also finalized a robust U.S.–ASEAN Energy Work Plan focused on increasing efficiency, promoting the use of renewable resources, and improving ASEAN’s electric grid.

Expanding Maritime Cooperation

 The United States is working to reverse environmental degradation and support sustainable fisheries and aquaculture in the ASEAN region. The United States recently began a new multi-year Oceans and Fisheries Partnership that will conserve marine biodiversity and strengthen regional cooperation to combat illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing through a catch documentation and traceability system.    The United States helped ASEAN to set up a public-private body to accelerate adoption of better aquaculture and fisheries management and facilitated the development of a fisheries improvement protocol to advance ethical and sustainable fishing for ASEAN.  Over the past few years, the U.S. government also sponsored multiple workshops to advance the goal of a cleaner, healthier marine environment, including on oil spill response, hazardous chemical clean-up, and combatting IUU fishing through both regulation and law enforcement. 

	The United States strongly supports ASEAN-led regional mechanisms and efforts to advance maritime security and awareness.  We have co-chaired the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) Maritime Security Inter-Sessional Meeting since 2012, and we also participate in the Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum and ASEAN Defense Ministers Meeting-Plus.  Earlier this year, United States Pacific Command (PACOM) hosted representatives of all ASEAN Member States for a workshop on Shared Maritime Awareness and will hold a follow-on workshop in 2016.  Also next year, the United States will sponsor the Expanded ASEAN Seafarer Training (EAST) Workshop on Counter-Piracy for the third time.  These efforts complement U.S. security assistance to ASEAN member states focused on enhancing maritime security capabilities. 

Cultivating the Emerging Leaders of ASEAN

	Young people represent 65 percent of ASEAN’s population.  We are developing a regional network for ASEAN youth to collaborate on solving common challenges, creating new opportunities, and building an ASEAN identity.  For example, the Young Southeast Asian Leaders Initiative (YSEALI) was launched by President Obama in December 2013 and now engages more than 47,000 participants aged 18-35.  It provides training, networking opportunities, and a platform to discuss their generation’s greatest challenges.  This past June, the President met with 55 YSEALI Professional Fellows and 20 YSEALI Academic Fellows at the White House. 

	The Fulbright U.S.-ASEAN Visiting Scholar Initiative awards scholarships for up to four months of research in the United States on issues central to the U.S.-ASEAN relationship and complements the 700 Fulbright scholarships between the United States and ASEAN Member States awarded annually.  The ASEAN-U.S. Science and Technology Fellows Program supports ASEAN early-career scientists to work for one year in ministries in their home countries to increase science-based policymaking.  With U.S. support, the ASEAN Youth Volunteer Program (AYVP) is mobilizing young volunteers to develop innovative solutions to social, cultural, economic, and environmental challenges. Over the past five years, the Peace Corps and ASEAN have doubled the number of countries and volunteers serving in ASEAN, and we anticipate further growth in 2016. The Peace Corps also works with ASEAN to develop volunteer-sending programs within ASEAN.  

Promoting Opportunity for Women in ASEAN

	Research shows that the more girls and women are educated and join the workforce, the more economies grow, infant mortality falls, and communities prosper.  The United States supports the ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women and Children (ACWC) by strengthening ACWC as an institution, supporting the development of a network of social service agencies, and helping to harmonize regional approaches to addressing violence against women and children.  The U.S. Government is supporting women entrepreneurs in partnership with the ASEAN Women Entrepreneurs’ Network.  For example, we are supporting majority women-owned enterprises, women entrepreneurs, and women artisans in Southeast Asia who develop products and services under fair-employment and fair-trade conditions.  Known as “GREAT Women in ASEAN,” this initiative is helping companies grow to reach new markets, and to take advantage of the ASEAN Economic Community’s regional platform.  In collaboration with the ASEAN Committee on Science and Technology (COST), this year we announced a new commitment to award an annual ASEAN-U.S. Science Prize for Women.

Addressing Transnational Challenges

	The United States works with ASEAN to address 21st century challenges that cross borders. 

	The November 2014 U.S.-ASEAN Joint Statement on Climate Change demonstrates our shared commitment to address this global issue.  The United States and ASEAN will continue cooperating through a wide range of activities towards a low-carbon economic growth trajectory and building more climate resilient societies.  We look forward to working together at the 21st Session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to achieve an ambitious, inclusive and durable agreement.  The United States is also proposing to engage ASEAN militaries to share our experience and technical knowledge in energy efficiency and reducing the carbon footprint of defense operations.

	We have long been a supporter of the ASEAN Wildlife Enforcement Network, helping to reduce consumer demand, strengthen law enforcement, and promote regional cooperation.  The United States provided training for about 4,000 law enforcement officials and support for anti-wildlife trafficking efforts that since 2008 has led to the confiscation of wildlife worth about $90 million on the black market and to the arrests of 1,332 suspects.  The United States also helped train 30,000 ASEAN individuals in natural resources management and biodiversity conservation over the last five years.

	The United States supports a victim-centered approach to combatting trafficking in persons and welcomes ASEAN’s new Convention against Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children and is working with ASEAN on implementation of the Convention which will harmonize domestic trafficking-in-persons laws throughout the region.  We are engaging with ASEAN to counter violent extremism and terrorism, and to provide support for the victims of terrorism.  The International Law Enforcement Academy Bangkok has trained over 3,000 ASEAN officers since 2012.  The curriculum is geared to help the civilian criminal justice sector address a variety of transnational threats such as organized crime, trafficking in persons, wildlife trafficking, and corruption, in addition to counterterrorism.

	The United States partners with ASEAN and countries in the region to promote openness and good governance, strengthen the rule of law, and build accountable institutions that are responsive to the needs of people in the region, including by helping ASEAN human rights bodies to integrate international human rights standards into legislative and judicial processes.  We are also working to strengthen regional civil society networks that promote and protect human rights.

	Cybersecurity’s importance to security and economic prosperity is of particular concern in Southeast Asia given that e-commerce is a major driver of economic growth for many ASEAN countries.  This year the United States co-chaired an ARF Seminar on Operationalizing Confidence-Building Measures (CBMs) with a goal of reducing the potential for cyber conflict by fostering transparency, cooperation, and communication mechanisms.  The United States supports continued cooperation with ASEAN states on cyber issues, including to build greater consensus on international norms of responsible state behavior in cyberspace. 

	The United States works with ASEAN’s civilian and military authorities to improve peacekeeping and the legacy of landmines and unexploded military ordnance.  The United States also works closely with ASEAN governments’ disaster management authorities and the ASEAN Coordinating Center for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster response coordination in support of the ‘One ASEAN, One Response’ initiative.

	# # #

	We, Heads of State/Government of the Member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the United States of America, gathered in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia on 21 November 2015 for the 3rd ASEAN-U.S. Summit. Today, we elevated our relationship to the ASEAN-U.S. Strategic Partnership to strengthen the role our relationship plays in realising this common vision of a peaceful, prosperous Asia-Pacific region that offers security, opportunity and dignity to all its citizens. 

	The ASEAN-United States relationship has expanded dramatically since formal relations began in 1977. The United States acceded to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia in 2009, was the first non-ASEAN country to appoint a resident Ambassador to ASEAN in 2010, and joined the East Asia Summit in 2011.  We institutionalised annual ASEAN-U.S. Summits in 2012. 

	We recognise that our relationship is grounded in shared principles, including the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and the ASEAN Charter.  We are committed to a rules-based approach in Asia, respect for international law and the peaceful resolution of disputes. Our partnership is committed to strengthening democracy, enhancing good governance and the rule of law, promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms, encouraging the promotion of tolerance and moderation, and protecting the environment. 

	ASEAN and the United States dedicate themselves to the ASEAN integration process and to building a strong, stable, politically cohesive, economically integrated, socially responsible, and a people-oriented, people-centred ASEAN Community, as reflected in the ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and its Blueprints. In realizing these objectives, we will also work together to strengthen ASEAN connectivity and narrow the development gap, including through development cooperation. 

	Further we are dedicated to ASEAN Centrality in the evolving rules-based regional architecture of the Asia-Pacific.  We recognise the important role we have each played, and that we have played together, in maintaining peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region. 

	Today we usher in a new era for our relationship as we come together to set a path for our future partnership with shared goals and priorities. We welcome the adoption of the Plan of Action to Implement the ASEAN-United States Strategic Partnership (2016-2020) to further strengthen this partnership, particularly within the five priority areas of cooperation, namely, economic integration, maritime cooperation, transnational challenges including climate change, emerging leaders and women’s opportunities. We will continue to cooperate through important ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the East Asia Summit, ASEAN Regional Forum, and ASEAN Defense Ministers Meeting Plus. We will also continue to engage through the Track 1.5 Expanded ASEAN Maritime Forum.

	We reaffirm the importance of maintaining peace and stability, ensuring maritime security and safety, and freedom of navigation including in and over-flight above the South China Sea. We reaffirm the collective commitments contained in the Declaration of the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC) to ensure the resolution of disputes by peaceful means in accordance with universally recognised principles of international law, including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the relevant regulations, standards and recommended practices of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) and the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO), without resorting to the threat or use of force and while exercising self-restraint in the conduct of activities.  We support ASEAN-China on-going efforts to fully and effectively implement the DOC in its entirety, and to work toward the expeditious conclusion of an effective Code of Conduct (COC). 


	The ASEAN-U.S. strategic partnership will also play an increasingly prominent global role in tackling transnational challenges.  We will build on existing cooperation such as the 2014 ASEAN-U.S. Joint Statement on Climate Change, and will work together to address challenging global issues such as terrorism, violent extremism, climate change, environmental degradation and pollution, energy, infectious diseases, disarmament, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, cybersecurity, trafficking in persons, illicit trafficking of wildlife and timber, and illegal, unregulated, and unreported fishing. 


	As to economics, American firms have been the largest cumulative investors in Southeast Asia, creating millions of jobs in the United States and in ASEAN Member States, while investment in America from Southeast Asia has increased more than from any other region in the past decade.  The ASEAN Economic Community will create many further opportunities for our citizens as it binds the region more closely together.  Going forward, we will work towards increasing two-way trade and investment, promoting trade and investment liberalisation and facilitation, encouraging sustainable and inclusive economic growth and job creation, and deepening connectivity. We also reaffirm our Leaders’ commitment to advance the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

	Our people-to-people ties are more robust than ever with millions of our citizens crossing to each other’s shores every year.  We endeavour to continue to strengthen these linkages and cultural ties, especially among young people, as well as to promote opportunities for all our peoples, particularly the most vulnerable.

	Today we dedicate ourselves anew to bringing security and opportunity to our peoples and addressing emerging regional and global challenges in the continued promotion of a peaceful, stable, integrated, and prosperous Asia-Pacific community. 

	Adopted in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, on the Twenty-First Day of November of the Year Two Thousand and Fifteen.

	Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

	11:57 A.M. MYT

	PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Well, it is a privilege to be here at the Dignity for Children Foundation.  I want to thank Pastor Satvinder and his wife, Petrina, who’ve run this foundation for years with the support of private donors and the United Nations. And I want to acknowledge the Malaysian government for its efforts to welcome and support refugees from around the world. Today, Malaysia hosts some 150,000 refugees and asylum seekers from countries as varied as Sudan, Somalia, and Myanmar.

	One of the reasons that I wanted to come visit here is because globally, we're seeing an unprecedented number of refugees.  The world is rightly focused on the humanitarian tragedy taking place in Syria, but we can't forget that there are millions of other refugees from war-torn parts of the world -- in fact, 60 million people are displaced all around the world.

	And today, as you saw, I had a chance to visit with some incredible young people -- those children upstairs, many of them have gone through extraordinary hardships.  They’ve taken really tough journeys.  Most of the children that we saw in the classroom there were Rohingya, who had fled discrimination and oftentimes ethnic violence in Myanmar.  And we're hopeful that with the transition in the politics of Myanmar, that the Rohingya people will begin to get treated fairly and justly in their own country.  But in the meantime, the refugees from Myanmar -- again, mostly Rohingya, mostly Muslim -- those young children up there, they’re deserving of the world’s protection and the world’s support.  

	And anybody who had a chance to see those kids, hopefully you understood the degree to which they’re just like our kids, and they deserve love and protection and stability and an education.  They are lucky that they’re here at this wonderful center and getting that kind of support, but there are a lot of children just like them who are not.  That's the face of not only refugees from Myanmar, that's the face of Syrian children, and Iraqi children, and children from war-torn regions of Sudan.

	And when I sat there and talked to them, and they were drawing and doing their math problems, they were indistinguishable from any child in America.  And the notion that somehow we would be fearful of them, that our politics would somehow leave us to turn our sights away from their plight is not representative of the best of who we are.  

	I just had an incredible conversation with the young men and women around this table who represent refugees from Myanmar and Sudan and from Somalia.  These are some of the bravest, hardest-working individuals that you’ll ever meet.  They recently completed steps to settle in the United States, and each of them described how incredibly grateful they were to have this opportunity to be part of a country that accepts people from around the world with all their diversity.  

	This young lady here is 16 years old, fled Myanmar on her own when she was eight, and was subject to human trafficking until the United Nations was able to help her resettle.  She’s now 16, and intends to be an advocate on behalf of fellow refugees in the future after she gets an education in the United States.  

	This is who we want to help.  This is the face of people all around the world who still look to the United States as a beacon of hope.  When we talk about American leadership, American leadership is us caring about people who have been forgotten, or who have been discriminated against, or who have been tortured, or who have been subject to unspeakable violence, or have been separated from families at very young ages.  That's American leadership.  That's when we're the shining light on the hill.  Not when we respond on the basis of fear.

	And if people have a chance to hear the individual stories here, you will see the degree to which they represent the opposite of terrorism and the opposite of the kind of despicable violence that we saw in Mali and in Paris.  We should lift them up, give them a hand -- because the more that we are spreading our concern and our values and our hopes and dreams with young individuals like this -- some of whom, even though they look very young, already have children themselves -- then we're creating more and more space for good people around the world to come together and to fight the darker, more violent forces in our world.

	So the good news is, is that in the face of this global crisis, more and more countries are recognizing that they need to do more.  The United States is currently the world’s largest donor for humanitarian aid.  We have shown that we can welcome refugees and ensure our security, that there’s no contradiction. And as long as I'm President, we're going to keep on stepping up and making sure that America remains as it has always been, a place where people who, in other parts of the world, are subject to discrimination or violence, that they have in America a friend and a place of refuge.  

	And I'm very excited to see what the individuals sitting around this table end up doing in the United States of America, because my suspicion is that they’re going to do great things.  

	Thank you very much, everybody.

	Kuala Lumpur Convention Centre
	Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

	7:10 P.M. MYT

	PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Thank you very much, Prime Minister Najib, and thank you to my fellow leaders for being here today.  I am very proud that this is my sixth meeting with ASEAN.  As President, I’ve deepened America’s cooperation with ASEAN because a united, integrated and effective ASEAN in the center of Asia is a force of stability, prosperity and peace.

	As the Prime Minister mentioned, I’m pleased today that we’re elevating our relationship to a new level -- a strategic partnership to guide and strengthen our ties for decades to come, including maritime cooperation.  The United States and ASEAN will be closer than ever.

	ASEAN plays a vital role in advancing a rules-based order for the Asia Pacific.  I commend ASEAN for working to ensure that all nations uphold international law and norms, including the peaceful resolution of disputes, freedom of navigation, and freedom of overflight.  And I applaud ASEAN for working to create a code of conduct for the South China Sea.  For the sake of regional stability, claimants should halt reclamation, new construction, and militarization of disputed areas.

	I also congratulate my fellow leaders on the formation of the ASEAN Community, which is another major step toward integrating economies and greater regional stability.  As the Prime Minister noted, we are already a major investor in ASEAN.  We do an enormous amount of trade.  You will continue to have the support and partnership of the United States.

	And I expect that we’ll also have an opportunity to discuss the urgency of confronting climate change.  ASEAN, like the rest of the Asia Pacific, is increasingly feeling the effects of warmer temperatures.  Almost all the countries here today have submitted their post-2020 climate targets.  So working together, I believe we can achieve an ambitious and durable climate agreement in Paris.

	We’ll have time to discuss hopefully some other issues -- educational and scientific exchanges, the work we are doing to counter violent extremism and terrorists.  But our partnership I think has grown stronger throughout these meetings and I’m looking forward to a very productive session again, here in Kuala Lumpur.

	Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister.

	END
	7:13 P.M. MYT

	WASHINGTON, DC — In this week's address, the Vice President spoke to his and the President’s commitment to protecting our country from terrorists, while also providing refuge to some of the world’s most vulnerable people.  He emphasized that he and the President consider the safety of the American people to be their first priority. But slamming the door in the face of refugees fleeing precisely the type of senseless violence that occurred in Paris last week would be a betrayal of our values. The vast majority of Syrian refugees are women, children, and orphans; survivors of torture; and people desperately in need of medical help. And all refugees undergo the highest level of security checks of any category of traveler to the United States. The Vice President reminded us that ISIL wants us to turn our backs on Muslims victimized by terrorism. We win by prioritizing our security while refusing to compromise our fundamental American values of freedom, openness, and tolerance. 

	The audio of the address and video of the address will be available online at www.whitehouse.gov at 6:00 a.m. ET, November 21, 2015.
