
	We are at a pivotal moment in the global fight against HIV/AIDS. Globally, both new HIV infections and AIDS related deaths are down by more than 40 percent since their peak. This Administration has invested nearly $50 billion through the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) to achieve an AIDS-free generation, building on the initiative and $15 billion provided by President Bush. Working with partner countries around the globe, we are now supporting life-saving antiretroviral treatment for 7.7 million men, women, and children worldwide; enabled more than one million babies to be born HIV-free; and tested and counseled more than 14 million pregnant women last year alone.

	Today, we are setting a bold, new course by announcing ambitious PEPFAR prevention and treatment targets for 2016 and 2017.

	The United States is committing resources to ensure PEPFAR will by the end of 2017 support 12.9 million people on life-saving anti-retroviral treatment, provide 13 million male circumcisions for HIV prevention, and reduce HIV incidence by 40 percent among adolescent girls and young women within the highest burdened areas of 10 sub-Saharan African countries.

	No greater action is needed right now than empowering adolescent girls and young women to defeat HIV/AIDS. Every year, 380,000 adolescent girls and young women are infected with HIV—7,300 every week, over 1,000 every day. This must change.

	Today, we are announcing that PEPFAR is now investing nearly half a billion dollars to support an AIDS-free future for adolescent girls and young women.

	Over the last 15 years, we have seen remarkable results as we have worked together toward achieving the Millennium Development Goals. PEPFAR’s new targets and investments come at a critical time as we transition from the Millennium Development Goals to meet the challenge before us in the new Sustainable Development Goals: to end the AIDS epidemic by 2030.

	We believe if we all – governments, the private sector, civil society, including faith-based organizations – bring our collective will and energy together we can achieve an AIDS-free generation and bring this epidemic to a halt.

	The United States congratulates the people of Burkina Faso for their success in defending Burkinabe democracy and reinstating the transitional government earlier this week.  Burkinabe citizens again refused to accept infringement of their right to choose leaders in a legitimate process, just as they did a year ago when the previous president attempted to extend his stay in office illegitimately.  The success of the people of Burkina Faso in peacefully resisting the actions of a few who sought to undermine democracy is a reminder that ordinary citizens with the courage to speak out against injustices are the ultimate protectors of democratic governance.

	We wish to express our appreciation to the international partners who condemned the events in Burkina Faso and took immediate action to help prevent the country’s democratic transition from being derailed, especially the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union, and the United Nations.  ECOWAS leaders, in particular, helped bring the parties together, pushed for the release of those being detained, and gathered to express their support for reinstating the transitional government.  These developments highlight the importance of regional leadership in upholding democratic standards and defending the rights of citizens to choose their governments.

	Burkina Faso now faces some of the hardest questions, and the United States will continue to stand with the people of Burkina Faso as they prepare for democratic elections.  We call on all parties to embrace peaceful dialogue and seek inclusive solutions that uphold the principles of democratic governance that the people of Burkina Faso have repeatedly stood up to protect.    
The United States congratulates the people of Burkina Faso for their success in defending Burkinabe democracy and reinstating the transitional government earlier this week.  Burkinabe citizens again refused to accept infringement of their right to choose leaders in a legitimate process, just as they did a year ago when the previous president attempted to extend his stay in office illegitimately.  The success of the people of Burkina Faso in peacefully resisting the actions of a few who sought to undermine democracy is a reminder that ordinary citizens with the courage to speak out against injustices are the ultimate protectors of democratic governance.
We wish to express our appreciation to the international partners who condemned the events in Burkina Faso and took immediate action to help prevent the country’s democratic transition from being derailed, especially the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union, and the United Nations.  ECOWAS leaders, in particular, helped bring the parties together, pushed for the release of those being detained, and gathered to express their support for reinstating the transitional government.  These developments highlight the importance of regional leadership in upholding democratic standards and defending the rights of citizens to choose their governments.
Burkina Faso now faces some of the hardest questions, and the United States will continue to stand with the people of Burkina Faso as they prepare for democratic elections.  We call on all parties to embrace peaceful dialogue and seek inclusive solutions that uphold the principles of democratic governance that the people of Burkina Faso have repeatedly stood up to protect.
	In this week's address, on “National Prescription Drug Take-Back Day,” the President spoke about the importance of preventing and treating substance use disorders.  Overdoses from prescription pain medications kill thousands of Americans every year, and more often than not, those drugs come from the family medicine cabinet.  In addition, many heroin users started out by misusing prescription drugs.  That’s why it’s important to take advantage of the DEA’s National Prescription Drug Take-Back Day and safely, conveniently, and responsibly dispose of expired and unwanted prescription drugs at collection sites throughout your community—no questions asked.  Drug disposal programs are part of the President’s 2011 Prescription Drug Abuse Prevention Plan, which also included increasing education for prescribers, expanding Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs, and pursuing Smart on Crime enforcement.  In his address, the President called on us all to continue to work to reduce substance use disorders through evidence-based treatment, prevention, and recovery.

	The audio of the address and video of the address will be available online at www.whitehouse.gov at 6:00 a.m. ET, September 26, 2015.
