
The First Lady’s Reach Higher initiative brings together over 20 social media, business, and nonprofit partners to help launch Better Make Room, a campaign squarely directed at Generation Z (14-19 year olds)

	The First Lady launched her Reach Higher initiative to inspire every student in America to take charge of their future by completing their education past high school, whether at a professional training program, a community college, or a four-year college or university.

	That is why, as part of her Reach Higher initiative, the First Lady is announcing a new public awareness campaign, Better Make Room, to target Generation Z, or young people ages 14-19, to celebrate education, change the national conversation, and reach students directly where they are and give them a space to create content while also navigating the college-going process. This campaign will leverage traditional and new media platforms to celebrate student stories in the same way that we often celebrate celebrities and athletes. With partners in the business, philanthropic, media, and education realm, this campaign will stretch across the country to inspire students and give them the tools they need to reach higher for college. 

Launching “Better Make Room”

Better Make Room celebrates students. It acknowledges that things aren’t easy. It elevates their stories, their bravado, and hard work to new heights. It tells their stories through a lens normally reserved for sports stars and celebrities. In an info-jammed world where fame means followers, likes and reposts, the campaign brings celebrities and influencers to the platforms that today give star power to their peers: those without the traditional luck or talent of some of today’s biggest stars.

Better Make Room says that students reaching toward higher education deserve equal praise and adoration. Through an integration of celebrities, peers, influencers, and partners who step outside their own accomplishments to lift up those of another, the campaign gives achievement, smarts, conquest and reaching higher the spotlight they deserve. Better Make Room highlights the possibility of a better education, a better career, and a better future.

The campaign does this while also making sure that young people understand the steps, tools and resources available to help them Reach Higher, such as registering for the SAT and ACT, visiting a college campus, filling out FAFSA, and completing at least four college applications.  Please go to BetterMakeRoom.org for more information. 

Better Make Room Partners

The Black Sheep Agency, a cause-driven brand strategy firm in Houston, Texas, developed the Better Make Room campaign for Generation Z, giving students a powerful voice with which to connect with one another on a national scale and launching a vibrant movement toward higher education. Better Make Room engages students in the creation of bold statements, powerful photography and branded content, forming a grassroots campaign that gains momentum with every tweet. Black Sheep ideated the concept, creative, design and engagement strategy framework with a team of local collaborators including Ergon Logic Enterprises, Ell Creative, Always Creative, Poetic Systems and Primer Grey. 

Vine is an entertainment network where trends gain traction and stars find an audience. As a company, Vine will be supporting the Better Make Room initiative on an ongoing basis by bringing top Viners into the campaign and creating entertaining content that will spread the campaign's key messages to the more than 200 million people who watch Vines every month.

Mashable is a global media company with a mission to inform, inspire and entertain the digital generation. Through this partnership with the Better Make Room campaign, Mashable will continue to further its mission by bringing the initiative online through its website and distributed channels. Mashable will tell the stories of those who are participating in #bettermakeroom and create awareness of the tools and support available to the digital generation for continued education.

UpNext is a new, anticipatory, text-based service that takes cues from how young people interact with technology to connect them with civic life through their daily mode of communication. To do this, UpNext sends personalized text messages to prompt users to apply for college, get student aid, and pay back their student loans as deadlines approach. The tool was created by a team of education experts, in collaboration with Huge, a digital and design firm, and the non-profit, Civic Nation.

AwesomenessTV, a leading media company serving the global Generation Z audience, will provide in-kind ad and promotion space across its platforms during key messaging times, as well as work with AwesomenessTV creators to generate content for the Better Make Room campaign. AwesomenessTV will also work with its ATV Network, a community based Multi-Channel Network with over 90,000 channels, encouraging them to create their own Better Make Room content.

The CW Network, America's fifth broadcast television network, available in more than 106 million homes, is committing to a continuing partnership with the Better Make Room campaign. The CW Network will produce a digital series of interviews, starring their talent and students from Better Make Room, to support the campaign; will tap into CW talent to create their own PSA; will promote content during the launch and during key moments for the campaign; and, both through corporate channels and use of on-air talent, help spread the word across their social platforms.

Funny Or Die, whose network reaches directly into the Make Room target demographic, will produce creative content and celebrity engagement to celebrate students pursuing college. Funny Or Die has over 19 million unique users per month, over 60 million video views per month, and has grown into a vertically integrated digital studio that produces content over numerous platforms -- reaching 11 million users on Twitter, 12 million on Facebook, and millions more on Snapchat, Vine, and Instagram.

Pearson is committed to inspiring students to pursue their education past high school and making sure that they have access to the information they need. To further this goal, Pearson will share Better Make Room content across its web platforms and through social media providing webinars and information sheets for students, parents, and school counselors on using the tools and resources. Adult learners and educators will also have access to similar resources through the GED program, a Pearson joint venture. Pearson’s leadership understands the importance of providing students with pathways to success in the demanding global economy of the 21st Century and is excited to help Better Make Room create opportunities for years to come.

CollegeHumor offers daily comedic content through videos, pictures, articles and jokes. CollegeHumor is the #1 most-viewed comedy YouTube channel. With more than 4 billion lifetime views, their content is some of the most-watched, most-shared, and most-acclaimed on the Internet.  The CollegeHumor brand has expanded beyond its digital presence into other forms of entertainment including film, television, books and live comedy shows.  To amplify and promote Better Make Room, CollegeHumor will produce in-kind videos to help amplify the message of Better Make Room.

Seventeen will promote and amplify the Better Make Room campaign across its brand platforms including print, digital and social reaching over 30 million teens. Additionally, Seventeen will play an important role in ongoing campaign efforts by featuring the Better Make Room messaging within a story on money matters for teens in March and a Cheat Sheet series running through September providing useful information to teens on education, funding and more.

PVBLIC Foundation, a media outreach partner for the campaign, is helping promote Better Make Room by creating partnerships with Lamar Outdoor and Adams Outdoor for digital billboards and with Conversant for online display advertising nationwide.

NBCUniversal Cable Entertainment will provide on-air and digital support for the Better Make Room campaign, through several of its networks, including USA, Syfy, Bravo, Oxygen, E! and Esquire.  In addition, USA’s award-winning Characters Unite public service campaign to combat discrimination will highlight the Better Make Room effort with editorial content, social media and partner outreach

A+E Networks, which includes the cable channels A&E, Lifetime, and History, is an award-winning, global media content company. A+E Networks, which reaches more than 350 million households in the United States and over 30 million monthly online impressions, is committing to a continuing partnership with the Better Make Room campaign. A+E will run Better Make Room PSA’s across their on-air and online platforms, including channels like History, Lifetime or A&E; will produce a future PSA and cover production costs; will promote content during the launch and during key moments for the campaign; will help plan and fund a campaign event; and will tap into A+E Talent to help spread the word across their social platforms.

The Y is one of the nation’s leading nonprofits committed to youth development, healthy living and social responsibility. We believe that all kids have great potential and work every day to help them set and achieve personal and educational goals. To support the Reach Higher initiative, YMCA of the USA (Y-USA) will disseminate information and resources to the 2,700 YMCAs in 10,000 communities across the United States, and encourage them to help build awareness and encourage participation in the initiative. In addition, the Y reaches more than 9 million youth each year, including three million teens who the Y is helping to shape through mentoring, college & workforce development, leadership development and civic engagement programs (6,500 different programs nation-wide). The Y will disseminate information and resources to our program participants, their families and the communities we serve, and build some of the components of the initiative into our existing program portfolios. 

The Williams Family Foundation is a private 501(c)3 organization founded by Abigail and Todd Williams of Dallas, Texas.  Having both benefited from a quality public education, the couple has chosen to dedicate the large majority of their philanthropic efforts to their greatest passion: ensuring a quality education is made available to as many in their local community as possible.  Organizations that the Foundation has supported include The Commit! Partnership (Dallas County’s educational collective impact backbone organization); Teach For America Dallas/Ft. Worth, part of the national organization which trains and recruits high quality education professionals;  Uplift Education, Dallas Ft. Worth’s largest public charter network serving 15,000 predominantly low income students and; Uplift Williams Preparatory, a 1,400 student K-12 school which the Foundation helped found in 2007.  The Foundation also operates its own college scholarship program, which over the past decade has assisted over 125 individual students with multi-year support.  They are excited to support the Better Make Room campaign and Reach Higher Initiative to better serve the next generation of leaders through increased access to higher education.  

The Edwin Gould Foundation invests in organizations that get low-income kids to and through college and runs the EGF Accelerator, an incubator in lower Manhattan for social entrepreneurs who have great new ideas that will help our target population achieve their college and career goals. The Foundation will help carry this important message through their broad and varied community of non-profit organizations that serve highly motivated, low-income students.

Lumina Foundation has always believed that young Americans need better and more timely information about the steps ahead when it comes to planning for their own education futures.  Better Make Room is an exciting new campaign that will engage potentially millions of Generation Z students with ideas and guidance to help propel them forward educationally and personally.  The Lumina Foundation is proud to support this strategic effort to invest in our collective future as a nation by helping young people find the right opportunities and resources to pursue their dreams.  They will provide technical assistance and support to ensure the campaign provides

American Eagle Outfitters is a leading global specialty retailer offering high-quality, on-trend clothing, accessories and personal care products.  Given American Eagle Outfitters' strong commitment to youth empowerment and education, the company will feature the Better Make Room campaign on its digital billboards in Times Square and will help spread the word to target demographics during the campaign across its social platforms.

Stackla is a social content marketing platform that puts user-generated content at the heart of brand marketing. The Better Make Room campaign will be driven by user-generated content, aggregated to a website powered by Stackla. 

The Teachers Guild, run by IDEO’s Design for Learning Studio and Riverdale Country School, is a professional community of teachers across the country who are daring to design better solutions for our students, schools, and the system. The Teachers Guild will run a challenge in partnership with Better Make Room, where students and teachers will create new options for expanded pathways to college. The ideas generated will be available for any teacher to try in their classroom or school. The aim of this partnership is to fuel the movement of students and teachers working together to help all students fulfill their dreams by putting the power of designing the future in their hands.

Get Schooled, a national non-profit, was founded on the belief that students themselves have the power to improve their future if given the right information and motivation.  Get Schooled leverages the key influences in teens' lives to directly motivate them to stay committed to graduating from high school and going on to college.  Get Schooled will engage its audience of more than a million teens across 1,700 high schools in specific Better Make Room content and activities to ensure more young people are taking the required steps to be college-ready.

The Jack Kent Cooke Foundation has been creating new ways to empower high-achieving students for fifteen years – they provide generous scholarships for students with financial need, create pathways to serve their communities, and organize annual gatherings for our scholars to share ideas.  They know the power of a supportive community, and that’s why they are excited to commit to the Better Make Room campaign, part of the Reach Higher Initiative. The Cooke Foundation celebrates the ambitions of first generation college students and young graduates ready to build their futures. Extending our community of scholars, scholarship applicants, and network of guidance counselors and educators will allow the Jack Kent Cook Foundation to promote and cheer on the underrepresented stars of the Better Make Room campaign.  They will share their stories through their newsletters and emails, on social media, and conference promotions.  They will also activate their Alumni COR, which leads seminars for students and parents across the nation, to highlight the campaign in its sessions with families. 

Ongoing College Opportunity and Affordability Efforts

Building on a Record of Progress: Since taking office, President Obama has taken steps to expand federal support to help more students afford college, while calling for a shared responsibility in tackling rising college costs and expanding college opportunities. Key achievements include:


Increasing Investments in Pell Grants and Expanding Education Tax Credits: Since 2008, the Administration has increased Pell Grant funding by 70 percent, and increased the maximum award by $1000.  In 2009, President Obama established the American Opportunity Tax Credit to assist families with the costs of college, providing up to $10,000 for four years of college tuition.  Pell Grants and education tax credits continue to provide students and families with $50 billion this year to help them afford college.
		 

Helping Students Manage Student Loan Debt: In 2013, the President and Congress enacted a bipartisan plan to keep student loan interest rates low, saving a typical student $1,500 over the life of loans borrowed.  The President’s Pay-As-You-Earn plan caps student loan payments at 10 percent of borrowers’ incomes and will be expanded this year to benefit up to 5 million borrowers. The Department of Education also eliminated subsidies to banks making student loans and transitioned to 100 percent Direct Loans, saving billions.
		 

Aligning Community College Programs to In-Demand Jobs: The President has invested $2 billion in 700 community colleges, supporting the development of education and training programs with employers and industry to prepare workers for jobs in-demand in their regional economies, such as health care, IT and energy. These programs have shown early success – through the end of FY2014, among the more than 176,000 individuals who had enrolled in these more than 1,900 new programs 85 percent either completed a program or continued the program into a second year. To expand on these successes, the President proposed $200 million for an American Technical Training Fund in this year’s budget to expand work-based learning opportunities, provide accelerated training, and accommodate part-time work.
		 

Reforming Student Aid to Promote Affordability and Value: The President has proposed reforms to federal campus-based aid programs to shift aid away from college that fail to keep net tuition down, and toward those colleges and universities that keep tuition affordable, provide good value, and serve students well. These changes in federal aid to campuses will leverage $10 billion annually to help keep tuition down.
		 

Spurring Innovation Through First in the World Grants: In September, the Department of Education awarded $60 million to 17 colleges and universities under the new First in the World grant program to test and scale evidence-based approaches to expanding college access and improving student learning while reducing costs.
		 

Publishing Better Information for Better College Choices. In September, the President released a redesigned College Scorecard – at collegescorecard.ed.gov – to empower Americans to rate colleges based on what matters most to them; to highlight colleges that are serving students of all backgrounds well; and to focus on making a quality, affordable education within reach. The College Scorecard publishes the most reliable, updated, and comprehensive data on students’ outcomes at specific colleges, including former students’ earnings, graduates’ student debt, and borrowers’ repayment rates.
		 

Making the FAFSA Simpler, Faster, and Easier: The President has significantly simplified the FAFSA by revamping the online form for all families so they can skip irrelevant questions; allowing over 6 million students and families take advantage of the ability to complete the FAFSA by populating income information from the IRS; and cutting the time it takes to fill out the FAFSA down to about 20 minutes, one-third of the time it took when the President took office. This past September, the President announced that the 2017-2018 academic year FAFSA will be available on October 1, 2016 – three months earlier – and that students can fill out their form by electronically retrieving an earlier year’s tax and income information. These changes can help hundreds of students access financial aid for the first time and save institutions 3 million hours on verification.
		 

Calling on Efforts to Expand College Opportunity: Last December, the President, Vice President, and First Lady joined college presidents and leaders of non-profits, foundations, and other organizations to announce over 600 new commitments to produce more college graduates. Community colleges made commitments individually, and in partnership with neighboring school districts and four-year institutions, to build seamless transitions among institutions, develop clear educational and career pathways, implement strategies to increase student completion of STEM programs, and establish more accurate measures of student progress and success. 


	Today, the White House will announce new commitments from companies from across the American economy who are joining the American Business Act on Climate Pledge. With this announcement, 81 companies will have signed the American Business Act on Climate Pledge to demonstrate their support for action on climate change and the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.  These 81 companies have operations in all 50 states, employ over 9 million people, represent more than $3 trillion in annual revenue, and have a combined market capitalization of over $5 trillion.

	By signing the American Business Act on Climate pledge, these companies are:


		Voicing support for a strong Paris outcome. The pledge recognizes those countries that have already put forward climate targets, and voices support for a strong outcome in the Paris climate negotiations.

		Demonstrating an ongoing commitment to climate action. As part of this initiative, each company is announcing significant pledges to reduce their emissions, increase low-carbon investments, deploy more clean energy, and take other actions to build more sustainable businesses and tackle climate change.

		These pledges include ambitious, company-specific goals such as:
		

				Reducing emissions by as much as 50 percent,

				Reducing water usage by as much as 80 percent,

				Achieving zero waste-to-landfill,

				Purchasing 100 percent renewable energy, and

				Pursuing zero net deforestation in supply chains.



		Setting an example for their peers. Today’s announcements builds on the launch of the American Business Act on Climate Pledge in July. This fall, the Obama Administration will release a third round of pledges, with a goal of mobilizing many more companies to join the American Business Act on Climate Pledge.


	The impacts of climate change are already being felt worldwide. Nineteen of the 20 hottest years on record occurred in the past two decades. Countries and communities around the world are already being affected by deeper, more persistent droughts, pounded by more severe weather, inundated by bigger storm surges, and imperiled by more frequent and dangerous wildfires. Rising temperatures can lead to more smog, longer allergy seasons, and an increased incidence of extreme-weather-related injuries, all of which imperil public health, particularly for vulnerable populations like children, the elderly, the sick, the poor, and some communities of color. No corner of the planet and no sector of the global economy will remain unaffected by climate change in the years ahead.

	Climate change is a global challenge that demands a global response, and President Obama is committed to leading the fight. The President’s Climate Action Plan, when fully implemented, will cut nearly 6 billion tons of carbon pollution through 2030, an amount equivalent to taking all the cars in the United States off the road for more than 4 years. The Clean Power Plan, the most significant domestic step any President has ever taken to combat climate change, will reduce emissions from the energy sector by 32% by 2030. And while the United States is leading on the international stage and the federal government is doing its part to combat climate change, hundreds of private companies, local governments, and foundations have stepped up to increase energy efficiency, boost low-carbon investing, and make solar energy more accessible to low-income Americans.

	The measures taken by the public and private sectors enabled President Obama to set an ambitious but achievable goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions economy-wide by 26-28% by 2025 last November. And in the eleven months since, we’ve seen unprecedented global momentum in the fight against climate change.

	To date, 150 countries representing more than 85% of global carbon emissions have reported post-2020 climate policies to the United Nations. This includes the major economies like the U.S., China, the European Union and India and it includes a large number of smaller economies, developing nations, island states and tropical countries – some of whom are the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.

	But these submissions are only the beginning of achieving a successful outcome in Paris this December that puts in place a transparent global framework for increasing ambition over time and continuing to drive down emissions over the course of this century. As the world looks toward Paris, President Obama is committed to building on this momentum, with American leadership at all levels – the federal government, state and local governments and the private sector.

Clean Energy Investment 

	Additionally, leading up to the White House Clean Energy Investment Summit on June 16, 2015, an independent consortium of long-term investors (“LTIs”), including sovereign development funds, pension funds, endowments, family offices, and foundations, committed to building a new investment intermediary that will identify, screen, and assess high-potential companies and projects for commercial investment that could also produce impactful and profitable solutions to climate change.

	Today, this consortium will announce its founding CEO, interim board of directors, sponsors, and confirms the intention of the LTIs to deploy at least $1.2 billion of investment capital through an ‘aligned intermediary’, which they anticipate will be formally launched and branded in mid-2016.

	The initial group of LTIs announcing financial commitments to work with the ‘aligned intermediary’ includes:


		$500 million from University of California’s Office of the Chief Investment Officer;

		350 million from the New Zealand Superannuation Fund;

		$200 million from the Alaska Permanent Fund;

		$100 million from TIAA-CREF; and

		$10 million from Tamarisc.


	The effort launches with research support from the Hewlett Foundation, ClimateWorks Foundation, and Planet Heritage Foundation, and a commitment of further operational support, pending final approval, from the MacArthur Foundation.

	As President Obama said at the U.N. Climate Summit last September, “There’s one issue that will define the contours of this century more dramatically than any other, and that is the urgent and growing threat of a changing climate.” The American Business Act on Climate Pledge shows that the U.S. private sector, with its history of innovation and ingenuity, is committed to stepping up and doing its part in taking on this global challenge.


*         *          *

THE AMERICAN BUSINESS ACT ON CLIMATE PLEDGE

We applaud the growing number of countries that have already set ambitious targets for climate action. In this context, we support the conclusion of a climate change agreement in Paris that takes a strong step forward toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

We recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment. 


	The following companies have joined the pledge and their detailed commitments can be viewed at:  www.whitehouse.gov/ClimatePledge

ABENGOA BIOENERGY US

	Since 2005 Abengoa Bioenergy has produced more than 2.5 billion gallons of renewable ethanol fuel in the US, displacing 2.5 billion gallons of petroleum based transportation fuel and reducing GHG emissions from those gallons by an average of 34%.  Building on this commitment to GHG reductions, Abengoa Bioenergy pledges to:


		Require our contractors and suppliers to calculate and report their GHG emissions in order to accurately and affirmatively achieve further incremental emissions reductions in the supply chain.

		Continue to improve energy efficiencies and emissions controls in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 10%, compared to a 2005 baseline, by 2025.

		Continue the startup and full scale operation of our newly constructed commercial scale cellulosic ethanol facility in Hugoton, KS, producing up to 25 million gallons per year of extremely low carbon fuel, reducing GHG emissions by approximately 90% compared to petroleum fuels.

		Complete development of new technologies and promote joint investment with third parties in further cellulosic ethanol production facilities utilizing a broad range of feedstocks, including municipal waste, as well as agricultural residues.

		Develop long-term business plans that align with the deep decarbonization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C.


AEMETIS

	Aemetis is planning to expand our technology platform and grow into new markets to combat climate change by significantly reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by displacing petroleum based fuels.

	Having met our 2006 pledge to deploy 100 MGY of low carbon biofuels by 2015, Aemetis further pledges to:


		Deploy over 400 MGY of ultra-low carbon fuel by 2025 with greater than 50% reduction of GHG, compared to gasoline.

		Invest approximately $800 million in new infrastructure for production of ultra-low carbon fuel by 2025.

		Utilize the lowest carbon intensity feedstocks, including agricultural residue and MSW, for the production of renewable jet, diesel, and gasoline replacing fuels.


ALCOA

	Building on our existing global commitment to reduce GHG intensity by 30% by 2020 (vs. 2005 baseline), Alcoa pledges to:


		Reduce absolute GHG emissions by 50% in the U.S. (vs. 2005 baseline) by 2025,

		Deploy our full range of innovations to develop materials, products and technologies that move us toward a low carbon sustainable future, and by 2025, demonstrate a net reduction of GHG emissions from the use of our products equal to three times the emissions created by their production.


AMERICAN EXPRESS

	American Express has taken measurable actions to reduce its carbon footprint, optimize the efficiency and sustainability of its workplace, and support its customers in reducing their environmental footprints. Currently, 100% of the electricity used to power American Express headquarters and 55% of the electricity used to power all the company’s U.S. operations is carbon-free, utilizing a mix of wind, biogas, biomass and solar energy. On-site green power generation and the purchase of renewable energy credits (RECs) helped American Express reduce its carbon emissions by 27.5% between 2007 and 2012.

	Building on this achievement, American Express pledges to:


		Reduce absolute GHG emissions by 10% globally (vs. 2011 baseline) by 2016.


APPLE

	Apple, already running all of its U.S. operations on 100% renewable energy, will bring an estimated 280 megawatts of clean power generation online by the end of 2016 through investments in Arizona, California, Nevada, North Carolina, Oregon and Sichuan Province, China. Since 2011, Apple has reduced carbon emissions from its global corporate facilities, data centers and retail stores by 48%.

AT&T

	By 2020 our goal is to:


		Reduce our direct greenhouse emissions (Scope 1) by 20 percent as compared to our 2008 baseline; and

		Reduce the electricity consumption of our company relative to data growth on our network by 60 percent as compared to our 2013 baseline.


AUTODESK

	Building on Autodesk’s long-term commitment to support and equip designers and engineers to help solve climate change while meeting our own science-based greenhouse gas reduction target, we pledge to: 


		Power our business and growing cloud services with 100% renewable electricity by 2020 as part of our continuing science-based greenhouse gas reduction commitment

		Provide new software and services to help cities and enterprises design, operate, and make the triple bottom line business cases for sustainable buildings, water, and transportation projects.

		Invest in people, start-ups and organizations who are designing climate solutions.  We invest dollars, software, and pro bono hours. 

		Prioritize education for designers, students and makers to design within the limits of the planet and to address the epic challenge of climate.  

		Continue to advocate for climate action in the IT industry, across the many industries we serve, and in the regions where we do business.


BANK OF AMERICA

	Since 2007, Bank of America has provided more than $39 billion in financing for low-carbon activities to help address climate change. Bank of America pledges to:


		Increase our current environmental business initiative from $50 billion to $125 billion by 2025 through lending, investing, capital raising, advisory services and developing financing solutions for clients around the world.

		Attract a wider array of capital to clean energy investments by developing innovative financing structures – from reducing investment risk though our Catalytic Finance Initiative to engaging individual investors through our Socially Responsible Investing platform to building new markets for green bonds, yield-cos and other vehicles.


BERKSHIRE HATHAWAY ENERGY

	Berkshire Hathaway pledges to:


		Build on our investment of more than $15 billion in renewable energy generation under construction and in operation through 2014 by investing up to an additional $15 billion.

		Pursue construction of an additional 552 megawatts of new wind generation in Iowa, increasing MidAmerican Energy Company’s generating portfolio to more than 4,000 megawatts of wind which is comparable to 57 percent of its retail energy load in 2017. MidAmerican Energy Company is the nation’s largest owner of wind generation among regulated, investor-owned utilities.

		Retire more than 75 percent of our coal-fueled generating capacity in Nevada by 2019.

		Add more than 1,000 megawatts of incremental solar and wind capacity through long-term power purchase agreements to PacifiCorp’s owned 1,030 megawatts of wind generating capacity. PacifiCorp is the nation’s second largest owner of wind generation among regulated, investor-owned utilities. This incremental renewable generation, expected to be online by the end of 2017, would bring PacifiCorp’s non-carbon generating capacity to more than 4,500 megawatts which equates to approximately 22 percent of PacifiCorp’s retail energy load in 2017. 

		Invest in transmission infrastructure in the West and Midwest to support the integration of renewable energy onto the grid.

		Support and advance the development of markets in the West to optimize the electric grid, lower costs, enhance reliability and more effectively integrate renewable resources.


BEST BUY

	Best Buy is committed to positively impacting our planet and our communities by reducing our impact on the environment, broadening consumer access to energy-efficient solutions, and supporting sustainable product life cycle management.

	Best Buy pledges to:


		Reduce our carbon emissions by 45% by 2020 (2009 baseline), derived from operational reductions and renewable sourcing. This science-based goal builds on our 2014 achievement of a 26% reduction in carbon emissions within our operations (2009 baseline).

		Provide an assortment of energy-efficient products and solutions to enable consumers to minimize their own carbon footprint. In 2014, we helped our customers prevent 900 million pounds of carbon emissions through the ENERGY STAR® certified products they purchased from Best Buy.

		Collaborate with industry partners to promote sustainable electronics through manufacture, transport, in-use phase and end-of-life treatment of products.


BIOGEN

	Biogen is proud to stand with other leading companies to support the American Business Act on Climate Pledge. This initiative is another demonstration of our ongoing commitment to corporate citizenship: improving the lives of patients, rethinking the way we use natural resources, developing and empowering our employees, and bettering the community.

	Biogen pledges to:


		Maintain its Net Zero Carbon Footprint. As of the end of 2014, Biogen became the first biopharmaceutical company to achieve carbon neutrality.

		Reduce our direct and indirect operational carbon emissions by 80 percent by 2020 compared to 2006, normalized by revenue.

		Reduce our water use by 80 percent by 2020 compared to 2006, normalized by revenue.

		Achieve zero manufacturing waste-to-landfill status at all major owned locations.


BLOOMBERG

	Bloomberg recognizes that carbon emissions have global environmental, social and economic implications.  And we are committed to addressing them through a combination of actions:  reducing consumption, buying renewable products and services, helping to set standards, encouraging disclosure and promoting clean technologies.

	As a information provider for banks, corporations, governments and others, Bloomberg is leveraging its data, news and analytics capabilities to help our customers identify, manage and seize sustainability and climate-related risks and opportunities.


		Reduce absolute emissions 20% by 2020 vs our 2007 baseline

		Improve Energy Efficiency 50% by 2020 vs our 2007 baseline

		Source 35% direct clean energy sources by 2020

		Generate a 20% or greater IRR on the investments described above


CARGILL

	Cargill established comprehensive goals around climate, energy, and water 10 years ago. We have improved energy efficiency by 16 percent, carbon intensity by 9 percent, and freshwater efficiency by 12 percent since setting energy goals in 2000 and climate and water goals in 2005. We continue to raise the bar and have set new goals through 2020.

	From our 2015 baseline, Cargill pledges to over the next five years:


		Improve greenhouse gas (GHG) intensity by 5 percent.

		Improve freshwater efficiency by 5 percent.

		Improve energy efficiency by 5 percent.

		Increase renewable energy to 18 percent of our total energy use, up from 14 percent.


	Cargill is a signatory to the United Nations’ New York Declaration on Forests, committed to doing its part to cut natural forest loss in half by 2020, and strive to end it by 2030.

	Cargill continues to work with customers and civil society to build sustainable supply chains that address climate concerns. We also partner with farmers and ranchers to help agriculture adapt to a changing climate. Our focus areas address sensitive needs in the critical supply chains of palm, soy and beef.


Palm: Cargill is building a traceable and transparent palm oil supply chain firmly committed to no deforestation of high conservation value (HCV) lands or high carbon stock (HCS) area; no development on peat, and no exploitation of rights of indigenous peoples and local communities.

Soy: Cargill has played a critical role in stemming the spread of deforestation in the Amazon by working with industry and NGO partners to develop and implement the Brazilian Soy Moratorium, a voluntary zero-deforestation agreement that contributed to a dramatic drop in deforestation in the region.

Beef: A founding member of the Global Roundtable for Sustainable Beef (GRSB) and the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Beef (USRSB), Cargill is committed to conserving, reducing and more efficiently managing resources, and mitigating greenhouse gas emissions.


CA TECHNOLOGIES

	CA Technologies pledges to:


		Reduce global greenhouse gas emissions by 35%, compared to a 2006 baseline, by 2020.


CALPINE

	Calpine is a leading independent power producer and we have long invested in clean, low-carbon and renewable energy resources.  We own and operate the nation’s largest modern fleet of low-carbon, highly efficient, combined-cycle natural gas-fueled power plants; we also are the nation’s largest operator of combined heat and power (CHP) plants; and we own the nation’s largest fleet of renewable geothermal power plants. 

	Calpine has been a longtime supporter of efforts to mitigate GHG emissions from the power sector.  We have also voluntarily taken steps to assure that we provide reliable, low-cost electricity in an environmentally responsible and sustainable manner. 

	Calpine pledges to:


		Continue in our efforts to support market based solutions aimed at lowering carbon emissions in the power sector.

		Explore investments in low carbon technologies, such as efficient natural gas turbines, renewables and battery storage, which complement our existing clean and efficient gas powered and geothermal fleet.

		Work with states where we operate to help develop the most effective Implementation Plans for compliance with the Clean Power Plan that take into account each states unique standing while achieving the common goal of reducing system wide GHG emissions over time.


CAMPOS BROTHERS FARMS

	Since 2009, Campos Brothers Farms has been actively focused on reducing our greenhouse gas emissions, as well as reducing our impact on a variety of environmental stewardship fronts, realizing a reduction of 19.7 Million pounds of CO2 from being released into the atmosphere.  Additionally, we have taken aggressive steps to reduce our water usage by 33%, have reduced our waste by 20% through recycling, orchard pruning management, and full utilization of all three products an almond produce; the hull (for livestock feed), the kernel/nut (one of the most nutritious foods in the world), and the shell (for livestock bedding). In addition, we have partnered with ‘Project Apis m’ to fund and direct research to enhance the health and vitality of honey bee colonies while improving plant production.

	Despite our progress, we recognize that more can be done that will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable growth. Building on our progress since 2009 to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, water use, waste and increase recycling in our operations, Campos Brothers Farms pledges to:


		Reduce the amount of CO2 being released into the atmosphere by an additional 166.4 Million pounds by 2025.

		Reduce our waste by another 25% through additional efficiencies and directive to utilize shells and orchard prunings for co-generation.

		Through increasing our solar power utilization by 400%, purchase of additional electric equipment/vehicles we will move from being nearly carbon neutral, to becoming carbon negative with respect to greenhouse gases.

		Reduce dust into the atmosphere by 60% by 2025

		Improve our company-wide recycling rate to 95% by 2025 up from our 2009 baseline of 75%

		Reduce water usage by at least an additional 10% through technology, soil and tree improving on our baseline of 33% reduction in 2009 by converting to micro/drip irrigation.

		Invest in additional research funding for Project Apis M to enhance the health and vitality of honey bee colonies.

		Participate in a new USDA-funded pilot project between the Almond Board of California and the Environmental Defense Fund  and others designed to give both almond and corn growers greater access to greenhouse gas markets like those under California’s cap-and-trade program


COCA-COLA 

	Coca-Cola pledges to reduce the carbon footprint of “the drink in your hand” by 25% by 2020.

	Across the Coca-Cola system (our company and more than 250 bottling partners globally), we intend to make significant, comprehensive changes, investments and technology advancements to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions by 25 percent by 2020 as our business continues to grow. We estimate that achieving this ambitious goal will prevent approximately 20 million metric tons of carbon emissions annually by 2020. That’s four times the Coca-Cola system’s annual carbon emissions from manufacturing.

	This goal is comprehensive and extends across our entire value chain - ingredient sourcing, manufacturing processes, packaging formats, delivery fleet, and refrigeration equipment.

COX ENTERPRISES

	Cox Enterprises has long been committed to environmental stewardship and conservation.  Since 2007, the company has invested more than $100 million in sustainability and conservation through its Cox Conserves program, which promotes and supports positive environmental change in our businesses and in the community. 

	Looking ahead, Cox Enterprises aims to send Zero Waste to Landfills by 2024 and become both Carbon and Water neutral by 2044. 

	We pledge to accomplish these goals by:


		Carbon Reduction through alternative energy, energy conservation and operating a more sustainable fleet.

		Water Conservation programs across our campuses and business operations that reduce our water footprint and balance necessary use with meaningful restoration.

		Waste Diversion driven by increased recycling, exploring new waste technologies, as well as employee and customer engagement.

		Renewable Energy investments in new energy generation technologies as well as existing, proven technologies.

		Sustainable Supply Chain partnership with suppliers, with a focus on conservation including reduction in energy and water used in manufacturing and distribution, reduction in air and water pollution and waste products, use of recycled content in products and packaging, investments in alternative energy sources, and prioritization of environmental friendly transportation.


DELL

	At Dell, we believe technology has an important role to play in both mitigating and adapting to climate change. While we will continue to focus on better understanding and managing our carbon footprint, we see our most important role as a provider of technology that will drive research, innovation and meaningful action. With this in mind, Dell puts forth the following pledges for action by 2020 that will reduce our footprint and help our customers to reduce theirs.

	Dell pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions from our facilities and logistics operations by 50 percent by 2020, compared to our 2012 baseline.

		Increase purchases of renewable energy to at least 50 percent of our total by 2020.

		Reduce the energy intensity of our product portfolio by 80 percent by 2020, compared to our 2011 baseline.

		Implement zero-waste packaging across our product offerings by 2020, sourcing all packaging materials from sustainable/renewable sources and ensuring all packaging materials are recyclable or compostable.

		Plant 1 million trees by 2020 (beginning 2008) to help sequester carbon and restore habitats.

		Incorporate 50 million pounds of recycled-content plastics and other sustainable materials into our products by 2020 (beginning 2013) as part of our transition to a more circular economy. Dell has already used more than 21 million pounds of recycled-content plastics in our products, including 4 million pounds of closed-loop recycled plastics recovered through Dell’s world-class electronics take back programs.


	Dell is also committed to demonstrating how technology solutions can create net positive effects – enabling customers to achieve social and environmental benefits that exceed the footprint of the technology used to deliver them. By 2020, we will demonstrate this net positive effect is 10 times greater than the footprint of the technology used to achieve it.

	We encourage others to join us in setting meaningful targets, taking action, and supporting global cooperation to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases and address climate change.

DSM NORTH AMERICA

	DSM is a global life science and material science company working to create brighter lives for people today and generations to come. DSM is a world leader in sustainable nutrition, materials and health.  It delivers innovative solutions that nourish, protect and improve performance in global markets such as food and dietary supplements, personal care, feed, pharmaceuticals, medical devices, automotive, paints, electrical and electronics, life protection, alternative energy and bio-based materials.  DSM has 22,000 employees world-wide and is headquartered in Heerlen, the Netherlands. The United States is DSM’s biggest country by sales and shareholder base, with approximately 4,000 employees and 35 sites.

	DSM has been in continuous operations for more than 100 years. “Dutch State Mines” or DSM, originally a coal mining company has transformed itself through acquisition and divestiture into a global leader in moving to a low carbon, circular economy rebranding the DSM acronym to mean “Do Something Meaningful.”

	This has translated into a continuous effort to reduce DSM’s carbon footprint and create more sustainably products in the United States and globally, and to work with developing nations to ensure that they have the tools to be a contributor to the world economy. 

	DSM is unique as a publicly traded company as it ties DSM executives’ compensation to sustainability goals.  Specifically, up to 50% of DSM’s variable executive compensation is tied to achievement of sustainability goals.  DSM also engages in integrated annual reporting, which includes its financial results alongside its sustainability results.

	DSM is engaged in an ongoing partnership with Department of Energy to reduce energy consumption by 20%; it made a $200 million foreign direct investment in a commercial scale cellulosic biofuels plant in Emmetsburg, Iowa; DSM created a 6 MW solar field project that  produces approximately 30-40% of its Belvidere, NJ manufacturing plant’s electricity needs at peak production and offsets CO2 emissions from the grid by more than 4,563 Metric Tons annually; it is engaged in innovative research to reduce carbon exemplified by DSM’s Clean Cow initiative that will reduce bovine methane emissions by up to 30%; and  DSM participates in long-standing efforts to reduce global hunger and malnutrition, including its partnership with the United Nations World Food Programme, Partners in Foods Solutions, USAID, Global Health Corp, World Vision and others.

	DSM makes the following pledges:


		DSM will move all operations, on 6 continents, to 100% renewable energy. DSM will move to 50% renewable energy by 2025.

		DSM will maintain an internal Carbon Price of €50/ton

		DSM will reduce its Green House Gas Emissions by at least 25% by 2020

		DSM will improve its energy efficiency by 20% by 2020

		DSM will continue to tie Executive Compensation to meeting sustainability targets.


EMC

	In support of our goal to achieve 80% absolute reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 in accordance with the 2007 Bali Climate Declaration, EMC Corporation pledges to:


		Realize a 40 percent absolute reduction of global Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions below 2010 levels by 2020

		Obtain at least 20 percent of global grid electricity needs from renewable sources by 2020

		Have all hardware and software products achieve increased efficiency in each subsequent version by 2020

		Reduce energy intensity of storage products 60 percent at a given raw capacity and 80 percent for computational tasks from 2013 to 2020


ENERGY OPTIMIZERS

	Energy Optimizers, USA pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 100%, compared to a 2005 baseline, by 2017

		Deploy 100% of our energy needs utilizing renewable energy by 2017 by utilizing solar, hydrogen and fuel cells

		Improve energy efficiency across 2,134 square feet of our company property by at least 45% by 2017

		Eliminate deforestation from the production of agricultural commodities by 2020, in alignment with the 2014 New York Declaration on Forests

		Develop long-term business plans that align with the deep de-carbonization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C


ENER-G RUDOX

	ENER-G Rudox, Inc. pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 25%, compared to a 2005 baseline, by 2025

		Improve energy efficiency across all company properties by at least 20% by 2025

		Increase investment in low-carbon, climate-resilient, and/or green projects by 50% by 2025

		Develop both short and long-term business plans that emphasize sustainability

		Proactively support the massive global effort needed to keep mitigate global warming


FACEBOOK 

	Facebook pledges to:


		We are committed to powering our operations with 100% clean and renewable energy.

		In 2012, we set ourselves the goal of having 25% of our energy in 2015 come from clean and renewable sources. We are on target to exceed that goal.

		We have doubled our previous target, setting a new goal of having 50% of our energy in 2018 come from clean and renewable sources

		We have designed and built some of the world's most energy- and water-efficient data centers - and will continue to invest in innovation in our infrastructure aimed at improving their efficiency even further.

		We have open-sourced our hardware and data center designs, and will continue to collaborate openly to drive efficiency improvements across the industry.

		We are working actively with dozens of other companies to scale up corporate purchases of renewable energy - sharing best practices and collaborating on policy changes to increase the options available so that more companies can buy more renewable energy.

		We believe in being open and transparent about our environmental performance. We have disclosed facility-level detail on our carbon and energy footprint for the last 4 years, and starting this year are including details on our water footprint. We also have public real-time dashboards for our data centers letting everyone see how efficiently they are operating.

		Access to clean and renewable energy is a key criterion in our site selection process for new data centers.


FULCRUM BIOENERGY

	Fulcrum BioEnergy, Inc., a leader in the development of low carbon drop-in transportation fuels from municipal solid waste, hereby pledges to:


		Develop and construct projects that will produce more than 300 million gallons per year of jet fuel, diesel and bio-crude by 2025;

		Produce low carbon fuels that reduce GHG emissions on a lifecycle basis by more than 80% compared to petroleum-based fuels; and,

		Produce these drop-in fuels from municipal waste streams that would otherwise be landfilled and don’t compete with food supplies.


GE

	Since its 2005 launch, Ecomagination – GE’s commitment to accelerate the development of technology solutions that save money and reduce environmental impact for its customers and own operations – has invested $15 billion in R&D and generated more than $200B in revenue. GE’s operations have seen a 31 percent reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions since 2004 and a 42 percent reduction in freshwater use since 2006, realizing more than $300M in savings.


		Last year, Ecomagination extended its commitments to 2020 with new goals: to invest an additional $10B in cleaner technology research and development; and to further reduce GHG emissions and freshwater use of GE operations by 20 percent from the 2011 baseline which aligns the company with the global goal of keeping warming to less than 2 degrees C.

		GE Ecomagination believes companies can be a positive force for change while also delivering for investors. Ecomagination has achieved both. As one of GE’s most successful business initiatives, Ecomagination brings strong returns for shareholders and improved cost and emissions savings for our customers.


GENERAL MILLS

	General Mills has long been committed to being part of the solution on climate change. Since 2005, we have reduced our absolute greenhouse gas emissions by 13 percent within our direct operations.  Now, we are furthering our commitment by announcing a goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions across our entire value chain – from farm to fork to landfill – over the next 10 years.

	Our goal, developed using science-based methodology, is an ambitious one. We pledge to:


		A [-28%] absolute reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2025, using a 2010 baseline. 

		Our long term aspiration is to achieve sustainable emission levels in line with scientific consensus by 2050. 


	In addition to mitigation, we recognize the importance of adaptation in building resilience. For this reason, we commit to supporting climate adaptation programs for key regions, particularly in key commodities. 

	General Mills has also made other significant commitments in the area of sustainable agriculture:


		We will sustainably source 100% of our top 10 ingredients by 2020.  These ingredients include vanilla, cocoa, palm oil, fiber packaging, sugar cane, wheat, oats, dairy and dry milled corn. Together, they represent 50% of our total ingredient buy.

		Eliminate deforestation from the production of agricultural commodities by 2020, in alignment with the 2014 New York Declaration on Forests


	Finally, we realize that this level of ambition cannot be realized by one company alone.  For this reason, we are signatories to UNGC, BICEP, We Mean Business, the New York Declaration on Forests and Climate Counts. 

	We believe that by advancing our commitment now, we have an opportunity to encourage others to do the same, establish new partnerships, and together, make real progress towards more sustainable emission levels for our planet and future generations.

GENERAL MOTORS

	General Motors pledges to:


		Reduce energy intensity from facilities 20 percent by 2020 over a 2010 baseline.

		Promote use of 125 megawatts of renewable energy by 2020 over a 2010 baseline.

		Reduce carbon intensity from facilities 20 percent by 2020 over a 2010 baseline.

		Reduce water intensity 15 percent by 2020 over a 2010 baseline.

		Reduce total waste 40 percent by 2020 over a 2010 baseline.

		Achieve 150 landfill-free facilities by 2020 and set an aspirational goal to have all manufacturing sites send zero waste to landfill.

		Maximize vehicle efficiencies and reduce carbon emissions around the globe while meeting a variety of customer needs.

		Help make electrified vehicles become more mainstream.

		Collaborate with others and proactively look for sustainability opportunities that collectively drive economic, environmental and social improvements.


GOLDMAN SACHS

	Goldman Sachs pledges to:


		Goldman Sachs has had a long standing commitment to harness markets and deploy capital to scale-up clean energy technologies and facilitate the transition to a low carbon energy future.  In 2012, we established a ten year goal to finance and invest $40 billion in clean energy globally.  Three-and-a-half years into that goal, we have already mobilized $33 billion of capital for solar, wind, smart grid and other clean technologies.  We expect to achieve the full goal within the next year and will commit to establish a larger 2025 target to deploy capital to clean tech and renewable energy.

		We will also harness financial mechanisms to help our clients strengthen their physical resiliency and more effectively manage risks relating to weather extremes.  Since 2006, we have structured over $14 billion of weather-related catastrophe bonds.  As part of our continuing efforts in providing risk management solutions, we will facilitate new models that can evaluate the financial benefits of increased investments in physical resiliency.

		Recognizing the importance of reducing our own carbon footprint, we pledge to achieve carbon neutrality across our operations and business travel in 2015 and maintain it thereafter.   We will also aim to use 100% renewable power to meet our global electricity needs by 2020.  Finally, by 2020 we will strive to reduce absolute energy use across our occupied operationally-controlled facilities by at least 10% from a 2013 baseline.


GOOGLE

	Google pledges to:


		Renewable energy: Google is committed to powering our operations with 100% renewable energy. We have purchased 1.1 gigawatts of renewable energy to power our data centers, and we commit to tripling our purchases of renewable energy by 2025. We believe that by directly investing in renewable energy projects, we can help accelerate the shift to zero-carbon power and create a better future for everyone. We commit to continuing our $2 billion/2.5 gigawatts cumulative investments in transformative global clean energy projects, including major investments by 2025 in emerging markets, where there is both great need and great potential.

		Transportation: Google shuttles and corporate electric vehicles result in net annual savings of 29,000+ metric tons of CO2, equivalent to taking 5,700 cars off the road or avoiding 87M vehicle miles every year. In our Bay Area headquarters we commit to reducing single occupancy vehicle commuting to 36%, a 10% reduction from today, by transitioning our employees to shuttles, carpool, public transit, biking, and walking.

		Water Usage: Google is committed to reducing our water consumption, particularly in the drought-ridden Western United States, through the use of recycled water irrigation, drought tolerant plants, less turf grass, fixture replacements and employee awareness efforts. After exceeding our 20% energy, water and waste reduction goals in 2014 associated with the California Best Buildings Challenge, we are now targeting a 30% reduction in potable water use by our Bay Area headquarters in 2015 from our 2013 baseline.

		Products and Platforms: Google’s products help drive carbon mitigation efforts and inform climate science. Our Google Earth Engine geospatial analysis platform makes more than 40 years of satellite imagery available online so scientists and researchers can analyze real-time changes to the Earth’s surface. Through the Climate Data Initiative, we provided one petabyte of cloud storage for data and climate/weather models, plus 50 million hours of high-performance cloud computing. We commit to continuing to develop products and platforms that can help reduce emissions and bring the power of cloud computing to climate science.


HERSHEY’S

	Since 2009, the Hershey Company has been actively focused on reducing our greenhouse gas emissions and our impact on climate change, as well as reducing our impact on a variety of environmental stewardship fronts, realizing a 23% reduction in GHG emissions from operations during that time.  Additionally, we have taken aggressive steps to source 100% RSPO sustainable palm oil. We have also initiated a partnership with The Forest Trust to trace our palm oil purchases and ensure our suppliers are not developing on peat areas and are identifying and reducing greenhouse gas emissions in their operations, two key factors that impact climate change. Finally, we have also partnered with Wildlife Works to purchase carbon credits to offset the unavoidable emissions from our sales and corporate fleet of vehicles. 

	Building on our 2014 pledge to deploy further actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, water use, waste and increase recycling in our operations by 2017, The Hershey Company pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by 2025, compared to a 2009 baseline, augmenting the 23% reduction we have already achieved

		Trace 100% of our palm oil purchases to the mill level by 2015 and to the plantation level by 2016, ensuring the palm we purchase is deforestation-free and grown and processed sustainably, in alignment with the 2014 New York Declaration on Forests

		Expand the utilization of electric vehicles in our corporate fleet, and continue to purchase carbon credits to offset unavoidable emissions in our sales and corporate fleet of vehicles while concurrently reducing these emissions

		Achieve zero waste to landfill status at all Hershey facilities by 2025, building on our existing roster of 11 zero waste to landfill facilities

		Save, an additional 25 million pounds of packaging material by 2025, augmenting the 16 million pounds we have already saved since 2009

		Improve our company-wide recycling rate to 95% by 2025, up from our 2009 baseline of 72%

		Reduce absolute water use by an additional 25% by 2025, building on our existing progress of reducing water use by 70% since 2009


Hewlett Packard (HP)

	HP Living Progress is our framework for thinking about how we do business. It’s the way we integrate sustainability into our business strategy, building on a commitment we articulated in our company objectives in 1957 and have reaffirmed every year since.

	With a rapidly growing global population and finite resources, “business as usual” is no longer an option. Through HP Living Progress, we make the environment stronger as we grow by improving the efficiency of our supply chain, operations, and products and solutions, as well as by making community investments that help tackle sustainability challenges. To this end, HP pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20%, compared to a 2010 baseline, by 2020

		Purchase 115 MW of renewable energy by 2020

		By 2020: Decrease first-tier manufacturing and product transportation-related GHG emissions intensity in our supply chain by 20% compared with 2010.

		By 2020: Reduce the emissions intensity of our product portfolio** by 40% compared to 2010 levels.  

		Reduce fresh water consumption (per employee) at HP office sites 20% by FY2020 compared to FY2010 baseline

		Explore long-term business plans that align with the deep decarbonization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C.


IBERDROLA USA

	With more than 6,000 megawatts (MW) of renewable electricity generation, 8,344 miles of electric transmission lines, 18,952 miles of natural gas distribution lines and 67,430 miles of electric distribution lines, and 67.5 billion cubic feet (Bcf) of natural gas storage, Iberdrola USA’s energy businesses are contributing to America’s clean, affordable and energy independent future. 

	Iberdrola USA has invested billions of dollars in electricity distribution and transmission networks, renewable electricity generation, natural gas distribution networks, natural gas storage facilities, and smart grid technologies in the United States.

	Iberdrola USA is a subsidiary of Iberdrola S.A. an international energy company that is the largest wind energy generator in the world and a leader in the battle against climate change. The company’s emissions per kilowatt-hour (kWh) are already 30% lower than the average of the European electricity sector and significantly lower than the U.S. average. Iberdrola S.A. recently committed to globally reducing the company’s overall greenhouse gas emissions intensity by 50% in 2030 compared to 2007 levels and to become carbon neutral by 2050.

	As part of Iberdrola USA’s continued commitment to reducing our carbon footprint in the United States, setting targets to reduce emissions, raising public awareness of the consequences of climate change and incorporating climate risk management into our business plans, Iberdrola USA pledges to:


		Align with Iberdrola S.A.’s commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the United States and achieve Iberdrola S.A’.s carbon intensity and carbon neutrality objectives.

		Add to our more than 6000 MW of renewable electric generation capacity in the United States. Iberdrola USA has identified and commits to build at least another 446MW of new wind generation in the United States. With the appropriate market conditions and regulatory environment, Iberdrola USA stands ready to develop additional wind and solar projects throughout the country.

		Pursue investments in transmission infrastructure in New England and New York to support the integration of renewable energy onto the grid, including providing better access to the New England grid for renewable resources in western and northern Maine and adjacent Canadian provinces, and providing enhanced transmission capacity between renewable resources in New York’s upstate counties and the New York metropolitan area.

		Improve resilience and reliability of energy infrastructure to extreme weather and climate change impacts through increased use of technology and automation, operations and maintenance procedures, and focused capital investments. Partner with the Department of Energy through the Partnership for Energy Sector Climate Resilience to develop and pursue strategies to reduce climate and weather-related vulnerabilities. Utilize the Department of Energy’s Value of Service model to develop a cost benefit and prioritization model for system hardening investments.

		Support the continued development and interconnection of new customer-owned generation sources which now total nearly 5,000 small-scale customer-owned facilities feeding into our existing grid.

		Introduce new grid technology to provide faster, lower cost integration for renewable energy resources up to 2 megawatts.

		Commit at least 5 percent of annual fleet acquisition dollars to plug-in electric technologies and, through the Iberdrola Foundation promote third-party PV charging station installations through grants to businesses, non-profits, and municipal governments in communities served by our electric utilities.

		Maintain ISO 14001:2004 certification for environmental leadership in project engineering and management, to develop and maintain the grid serving the region’s renewable energy resources at the highest environmental standards.


IBM

	IBM has been a global leader regarding energy efficiency and the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions for decades. For example:


		Between 1990 and 2014 IBM saved 6.8 million megawatt hours of electricity consumption, avoided 4.2 million metric tons of CO2 emissions, and saved $550 million through energy conservation actions.

		We have deployed new I/T solutions developed by IBM for managing the energy efficiency of buildings and data centers. These solutions have typically driven 10% reductions in energy consumption for the systems they monitor.

		In 2014 we used 683,000 megawatt hours of renewable electricity, representing 14.2% of IBM's global electricity consumption and a 17.9% increase from 2013.

		We have already reduced IBM's operational CO2 emissions over 25% against a 2005 baseline.


	We put forth our pledges as follows:


		Reduce CO2 emissions associated with IBM’s energy consumption 35% by year-end 2020 against base year 2005 adjusted for acquisitions and divestitures.

		Procure electricity from renewable sources for 20% of IBM's annual electricity consumption by 2020.

		Achieve annual energy conservation savings equal to 3.5% of IBM's total energy use.


IKEA USA

	At IKEA, sustainability is central to our business. Because climate change is one of the biggest challenges facing society, IKEA Group and IKEA Foundation this year made bold new commitments totaling 1 billion in funding to accelerate the transition to a low-carbon economy and support the communities most at risk. In June, the IKEA Group committed 600 million for investment in renewable energy, building on the 1.5 billion invested in wind and solar energy since 2009. In addition, the IKEA Foundation has committed 400 million of funding to support the communities most impacted by climate change.

	Looking forward, we put forth our additional pledges as follows:

	IKEA pledges to:


		Produce as much renewable energy as the total energy we consume in our global operations by 2020. This is already the case in the US, where the IKEA Group’s wind farm in Hoopeston, IL is on target to produce 165% of the electricity and 130% of the energy equivalent to that consumed by IKEA US operations. In addition, the IKEA solar presence in the US consists of 42 solar projects across nearly 90% of IKEA US locations.

		Become 30% more energy efficient in our own operations by August 2020, compared to FY10.

		Reduce carbon emissions from the transport of goods by 30% by 2020 (in relative terms) compared with FY12, for example by reducing the number of shipments through improving our ordering process, equipment, packaging, and net cubic meters of transported goods per shipment, and by increasing the use of rail, barge, and sea rather than road transport.

		Encourage and enable our direct suppliers to become 20% more energy efficient by August 2017, compared to FY12 (defined as total energy consumed/m3 of goods).

		Take the lead in developing and promoting products and solutions that inspire and enable people to live a more sustainable life at home, and achieve more than a fourfold increase in sales of those products and solutions by August 2020, compared to FY13.

		By August 2020, we will contribute to FSC certification of another 10 million hectares of forest in priority areas – which is equivalent to more than double the total area needed to supply IKEA. This is in addition to 35 million hectares of FSC forest already added through our earlier partnership projects.

		By August 2020, we aim to source 100% of our wood, paper and cardboard from more sustainable sources (currently defined as FSC certified or recycled wood).

		By August 2020, 90% of the waste from our own operations will be recycled or energy recovered, of which 80% of the waste from stores and distribution centers and 90% from IKEA Industry Group will be material recycled.


INGERSOLL RAND

	Ingersoll Rand, a world leader in creating comfortable, sustainable and efficient environments, is committed to addressing the unsustainable global demand for energy resources and its impact on the environment for our employees, customers and shareholders.

	Ingersoll Rand pledges to:


		Reduce emissions from our products and our operations by over 20 MMT (metric tons) CO2e by 2020 and expect to cut 50 MMT CO2e by 2030.

		Invest $500 million in product-related research and development over the next five years to fund the long-term reduction of GHG emissions without compromising energy efficiency or safety.


INTERNATIONAL PAPER

	International Paper is a leader in the use of renewable energy to manufacture our products. Approximately 70 percent of the energy used in our global mill system is self-generated using renewable carbon neutral biomass residuals. Our use of biomass residuals for energy displaces significant fossil fuel use and related GHG emissions.

	From a 2010 baseline, we improved energy efficiency by 6 percent (14 trillion Btu/year) and reduced our absolute greenhouse gas emissions by 8 percent (1.4 million tons of CO2e a year).   Since 2012, International Paper has invested $424 million globally in energy projects yielding great results.

	International Paper’s 2020 Sustainability goals include pledges over the next five years that will:


		Reduce absolute greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 20 percent (3.4 million tons of GHEe a year)

		Improve purchased energy efficiency by 15 percent (34 trillion Btu/year)


	These pledges build on International Paper’s ongoing sustainability goals established in 2010 which continue to improve our manufacturing efficiencies. 

	International Paper is committed to responsible forestry around the world and is a leader in the international effort to stop illegal logging and ensure timber legality in the global supply chain.  International Paper supports robust, ambitious measures in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) agreement and future agreements like the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) that advance greater international action to combat illegal logging. 

INTEL

	Over 20 years ago, Intel established public environmental goals to reduce its environmental footprint, including greenhouse gas emissions. Since 2000, we have reduced our absolute greenhouse gas emissions nearly 40% and our emission intensity by approximately 60%. That substantial progress has been accomplished in part due to aggressive efforts to reduce our emissions of fluorinated gases, a critical component in semiconductor manufacturing. We have installed 20 on-site renewable energy projects to date and will purchase over 3 billion kW-hrs of green power this year, making Intel the largest purchaser in the US for the 7th consecutive year.

	To further build on these efforts we pledge to accomplish the following by 2020:


		Continue 100% green power in our US operations and increase renewable energy use for our international operations

		Grow the installation and use of on-site renewable energy to triple our current levels

		Building upon our 60% reduction in emission intensity, further reduce our greenhouse gas emission intensity an additional 10% over a 2010 baseline 

		Achieve 4 billion kW-hrs of energy savings through implementation of energy efficiency projects at our global facilities

		Build all new buildings to high energy efficiency standards by meeting the US Green Building Council’s LEED gold designation or better

		Increase the energy efficiency of our notebook and datacenter products 25 fold from a 2010 baseline


	In addition to the numerical goals above we will aggressively deploy new products and technologies that assist others in reducing their carbon emissions and we will publically track our progress to reduce our carbon footprint and compare our results to a widely-accepted international benchmark, the IPCC’s 2050 target.

INTEX SOLUTIONS, INC.

	Intex Solutions, Inc. pledges to continue our efforts to be leaders in energy and water conservation, and set an example for other enterprises.


		Intex Solutions, Inc. installed solar panels on our headquarters building 15 years ago.

		We measure all remaining carbon emissions and pays for offsets through the Carbon Fund 

		Measures all the electricity used while providing services in our clients buildings and pays for offsets to the Carbon Fund for any emissions related to that usage

		Won an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Small Business Award for energy saving measures such as lighting retrofits and giving employees energy efficient bulbs for their homes.


INVENERGY

	Building on our track record of leadership in the development and operation of no- and low-carbon energy technologies, Invenergy pledges to:


		Increase our total deployment of renewable energy capacity by 30% by 2025, relative to today’s baseline of 4,746 megawatts.

		Supply American utility, commercial and industrial companies with 1 gigawatt of new wind and solar generation by 2020.

		Double our total deployment of advanced energy storage by 2020 from our 2015 total of 68 megawatts, which will enable additional deployment of renewables.


JOHNSON AND JOHNSON

	At Johnson & Johnson, we understand the intrinsic link between a healthy environment and human health. As the world’s largest and most broadly-based health care company, our mission is to help people live longer, healthier and happier lives. Our Credo defines our responsibilities to people and the planet, and our citizenship and sustainability practices are an important part of fulfilling this commitment.

	As part of our 2020 Citizenship & Sustainability Goals and as a continuation of our legacy in stewarding a healthy environment, we have established new science-based climate goals:


		Reduce our absolute carbon emissions by 20% by 2020 and 80% by 2050; and,

		Produce/Procure 20% of our electricity from clean/renewable energy sources by 2020; and, aspire to power all of our facilities with renewable energy by 2050.


JOHNSON CONTROLS

	Johnson Controls, a global multi-industrial company, has made public commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve sustainability since 2003.  From 2002 through 2014, we reduced our global greenhouse gas intensity by 41 percent and our energy intensity by 40 percent. Additionally, we have already achieved 21 percent of our 25 percent ten year energy intensity reduction goal in only five years as part of the U.S. DOE Better Plants Challenge.  We have also recently established updated corporate targets for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, energy, water and waste.

	From a 2014 baseline, Johnson Controls pledges the following by 2020:


		Reduce greenhouse gas intensity (in metric tons/revenue) by 15 percent

		Reduce energy intensity (in gigajoules/revenue) by 15 percent


	In addition, Johnson Controls pledges to provide our small and medium enterprise suppliers with energy management tools and training to help them become more energy efficient, sustainable and competitive.  We also commit to invest in the development of new products that expand our use of low-GWP alternatives to HFC refrigerants that best meet the safety, efficiency, reliability, availability, and financial requirements of our customers.

KELLOGG’S

	The purpose of Kellogg Company is to nourish families so they can flourish and thrive ─ from the farmers who grow our ingredients, to the employees who bring our values to life, and the consumers who buy our foods, all of whom want a better world for generations to come. We support the implementation of a strong climate change agreement coming out of Paris that ultimately puts us on a path toward a low-carbon, sustainable future.

	The body of science behind climate change has grown clearer and more focused. We recognize that failure to address global warming will make it difficult for Kellogg to continue to meet global food demand and ensure future generations will have a higher quality of life. Kellogg takes a comprehensive approach to reducing our environmental footprint by reducing our carbon emissions; the amount of waste we generate; and, the amount of natural resources we use. We are committed to participating in multiple programs addressing climate risk and transparency, including President Obama’s Climate Data Initiative and the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Global Open Data for Agriculture & Nutrition Initiative, and organizations such as Business for Innovative Climate & Energy Policy (BICEP) and the Bipartisan Policy Center (BPC). 

	As a leading global food company, today Kellogg is pledging to take additional steps, including to:


		Further reduce energy and GHG emissions by an additional 15% from 2015 performance; 

		Announce by the end of the year an even more aggressive overall carbon reduction goal that’s tied to the science, limiting further warming to 2 degrees Celsius, and which includes our agricultural supply chain;

		Expand the use of low carbon energy in plants by 50% by 2020;

		Implement water reuse projects in 25 percent of plants by 2020,and further reduce water use by an additional 15% from 2015 performance;

		Increase to 30% the number of plants sending zero waste to landfill by 2016;

		Achieve zero net deforestation by 2020 in high-risk supply chains including soy, palm oil, timber, fiber and soy; and

		Support livelihoods for 500,000 farmers, many of whom are women, through partnerships, research and training on climate smart agriculture which helps farmers adapt to climate change while assuring productivity of their yields and reducing greenhouse gas emissions from their agricultural practices.


KINGSPAN INSULATED PANELS, INC.

	Building on a 2010 Kingspan Global Corporate pledge Kingspan Insulated Panels – North America pledges to:


		Savings of 1.4% per year beyond achieving the Better Plants goal (25% improvement in energy intensity) in 2015, cumulative CO2 emissions avoided by the end of the currentpledge period (2021) is 10,615,053 kg.CO2.eq. By extending the pledge beyond 2021 with the same rate (1.4% per year), by the end of year 2025 Kingspan would achieve ~39% improvement in energy intensity. This is equivalent to avoiding CO2 emissions of 12,882,490 kg.CO2.eq.

		These Improvements energy efficiency and related Greenhouse Gases reductions are across 452,850 square feet of operations property in the United States. Kingspan’s Insulated Metal Panel products also contribute to high thermal performance as exterior enclosure solutions that reduce Demand Side Energy and related Greenhouse Gases.  These products are specified on commercial/industrial projects and contribute to “green” building performance criteria.


LAKESHORE LEARNING MATERIALS

	Lakeshore Learning Materials pledges to:


		Invest $1 million in solar panels that will be installed by 2018 and will produce an estimated 4,500 MW of renewable energy by 2025

		Avoid 3,600 tons of greenhouse gas emissions by 2025 through the use of solar power

		Install motion-activated restroom fixtures that will reduce water use by 42,000 tons and conserve 68 tons of paper by 2025

		Conserve energy and resources with an active recycling program that will include the reuse of over 8,000 tons of cardboard by 2025

		Continue to invest in green projects similar to those Lakeshore has launched over the last several years, including the installation of electric vehicle charging stations, a switch to lower-impact packing materials, and the creation of a complete line of low-emission, environmentally friendly furniture


LAM RESEARCH

	In 2011, Lam formalized public environmental targets to reduce our environmental footprint, including energy and hazardous waste. Since 2011 we have reduced our energy consumption intensity by 21% and our hazardous waste generation intensity by 74%.

	To further build on these efforts we pledge to target the following by 2020:


		Increase renewable energy consumption in our domestic operations to 25%

		Reduce our greenhouse gas emission intensity by 20% from a 2012 baseline

		Achieve an accumulated 14 million kW-hrs of energy savings intensity through implementation of energy efficiency projects at our global facilities from a 2012 baseline

		Build all new buildings to EPA Energy Star standards

		Consistently increase the product and service offerings that enable customers to reduce energy usage, chemical consumption, and greenhouse gas emissions in their operations


	In addition to the goals above, we cascade our environmental management system requirements and expectations throughout our supply chain. Lam publicly tracks and makes available our sustainability progress in our annual Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) report and we benchmark performance to other leading companies in the semiconductor industry.

LEVI STRAUSS & CO.

	At Levi Strauss & Co., we believe that climate change mitigation is vital to the long-term success of our business, and the health and well-being of the people who make and buy our products. We’ve been working for decades to reduce our environmental impact in our operations and supply chain. Our vision is to reduce carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases through maximizing energy efficiency and using 100% renewable energy — first in our operations and then throughout the supply chain – and to continue to build sustainability into everything we do. We have been, and will continue to be, outspoken champions for public policies aimed at reducing greenhouse gases. 

	Levi Strauss & Co. pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions 25% by 2020 in our office, retail and distribution locations.

		At our owned and operated manufacturing plants, reduce greenhouse gas emissions 5% annually per product shipped.

		Purchase a minimum of 20% of our energy from renewable sources by 2020.

		Ensure that no forest-based materials that originate from the world’s ancient and endangered forests enter into our supply chain by 2020.


L’OREAL USA

	By the year 2020, L’Oreal will:


		Reduce CO2 emissions at our plants and distribution centers by 60% in absolute terms, from a 2005 baseline.

		Reduce our water consumption by 60% per finished product unit, from a 2005 baseline.

		Reduce waste by 60% per finished product unit, from a 2005 baseline.

		Send zero waste to landfill.

		Reduce our CO2 emissions from transportation of products by 20% per finished product unit from a 2011 baseline.

		Source 100% renewable raw materials from sustainable sources. We also confirm our ambition to “Zero Deforestation” to include:
		

				By 2020, the goal is 100% of palm supply will be free from deforestation.

				By 2020, the goal is to have 100% certified board and paper for packaging and POS (promotional material)




MARS

	Mars, Incorporated has established a set of ambitious, science-based goals designed to drive our global operations toward being Sustainable in a Generation (SIG). Under these SIG goals, and as part of our broader sustainability programs, Mars pledges to:


		Reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and eliminate 100% of GHG emissions from our operations by 2040. We are on track to reduce our 2015 GHG emissions by 25% (from a 2007 baseline)

		Pursue renewable energy projects around the world that are modeled after the 118-turbine, 200mw wind farm we brought online in 2015 and which now provides the equivalent of 12% of our global energy requirements, 100% of our U.S. power needs, and has eliminated 24% of our global GHG

		Achieve zero waste to landfill across all of our facilities globally by the end of 2015

		Build all of our new sites globally to the LEED Gold Standard

		Continue to build on our current deforestation policy, which covers the key raw materials in our supply chain (including palm oil, beef, pulp, paper and soy), and source only from producers and suppliers who agree to our strict sourcing standards

		Use our voice, our expertise and our position as a leading global company to identify and advance innovative carbon reduction measures within the agriculture and food sectors, and continue to encourage governments to set clear, achievable, measurable and enforceable science-based targets for carbon emissions reductions.


McDONALD’S CORPORATION

	McDonald’s believes climate change presents a significant global challenge that, if left unaddressed, will have far-reaching implications for generations to come. As a global food company, we depend on healthy ecosystems and communities around the world to help produce the food and beverages our customers love. As a modern and progressive burger company, we recognize the role we play in addressing this important challenge and doing what we can to reduce our carbon footprint. We aspire to develop and operate the most environmentally-efficient McDonald’s restaurants and to source our food and packaging sustainably.

	McDonald’s puts forth our pledges as follows:

Deforestation: As demonstrated by our endorsement of the United Nations’ New York Declaration on Forests in 2014 and our Commitment on Deforestation made in April 2015, McDonald’s is committed to eliminating deforestation from our global supply chain. We will focus our initial efforts on beef, fiber-based packaging, palm oil, coffee, and soy used for beef & poultryfeed, given their link to deforestation. We will share time-bound deforestation-free targets for these priority products by the end of this year.

Beef: McDonald’s supports the sustainable production of beef. We helped found the Global Roundtable for Sustainable Beef (GRSB) to bring together key stakeholders around a common purpose. In 2014, the GRSB led a collaborative effort to finalize global principles and criteria for sustainable beef production which, among other focus areas, involves managing natural resources responsibly and working to enhance ecosystem health. We are developing goals and will begin purchasing a portion of our beef from verified, sustainable sources starting in 2016.

Palm Oil: By 2020, our goal is for 100% of the palm oil used in our restaurants worldwide and as an ingredient in McDonald’s products to be verified as having come from a system that supports sustainable palm oil production. We will continue encouraging McDonald’s palm oil suppliers to move toward traceable and transparent palm oil supply chains as a way to ensure no deforestation.

Fiber: By 2020, our goal is to source 100% of fiber-based packaging from recycled or certified sources. As the first global restaurant business in World Wildlife Fund's (WWF) Global Forest & Trade Network, we support its initiative to eliminate illegal logging and transform the global marketplace to save the world’s valuable and threatened forests.

Coffee: By 2020, our goal is to have 100% of our coffee verified as supporting sustainable production. We will work with globally recognized programs and provide support for coffee farmers through initiatives such as our technical assistance project in Guatemala

Restaurant Energy:


		Energy Efficiency: Our goal is to increase energy efficiency 20% by 2020 in company-owned restaurants in our top markets, with a focus on restaurant design standards, equipment innovation and operational practices. As we continue to advance our strategic work in this area, we expect to evolve the structure, metrics, and scope of these aspirations in the next year using an appropriate baseline.

		Renewable Energy: McDonald’s USA is a signatory to the Corporate Renewable Energy Buyers’ Principles, developed by WWF and World Resources Institute (WRI). We support a shared mission to increase access to cost-competitive renewable energy across the McDonald’s U.S. system.

		In 2014, the McDonald’s company-owned restaurants and franchisees in Europe purchased 76% of their electricity from renewable sources across 21 markets, 10 of which have achieved or are working toward purchasing 100% renewable electricity. McDonald’s U.K. has committed for a 20-year period to purchase renewable energy directly from new infrastructure.


Restaurant Waste & Recycling: Our goal is to minimize waste and increase the amount of in-restaurant recycling to 50% by 2020 in our top markets, which involves efforts such as packaging optimization and expanding our recycling of materials including corrugated cardboard and used cooking oil.

MICROSOFT

	At Microsoft, we’re committed to driving environmentally sustainable business practices and catalyzing technology innovations that help people and organizations around the world to realize a sustainable future. Microsoft pledges to:


		Maintain carbon neutral operations for our datacenters, offices, labs, manufacturing facilities, and business air travel.

		Purchase 100% renewable energy for the operations of our datacenters, offices, labs, and manufacturing facilities.

		Offset 100% of emissions from business air travel through supporting carbon offset projects that also drive social benefits in emerging nations.


MONSANTO

	Monsanto pledges to:

Internal Operations


		Monsanto GHG Operational Footprint Goal- Reduce Crop Protection Greenhouse Gas Emissions by an additional 22% on a per product basis by 2020 (baseline 2010). This represents a cumulative reduction of 45% from 2002.

		Company Commits to Increase Irrigation Water Efficiency Across Operations, Saving 30 to 80 Billion Gallons of Fresh Water Every Year by 2020 (baseline 2010).


Collaborations and offerings to growers:


		Climate Corporation provides growers have the opportunity to utilize data analytics and monitor nitrogen in corn production on a field by field basis.  This is one of several features that supports sustainable intensification- maximum productivity with the optimal amount of inputs.

		Through collaborations Monsanto will safely and sustainably innovate through advanced breeding and biotechnology to advance new plant varieties and hybrids as well as precision management tools that give farmers more choices to measurably improve nutrient use efficiency and curb greenhouse gas emissions on at least one million acres in the United States by 2020.

		Through collaborations Monsanto will drive cover crop research trials on over 100 locations across the Midwest to validate economic and yield benefits to both growers and society.

		University of Chicago research compared the impact of the 2012 drought relative to the last significant drought in 1988 and the impact of improved technology for farmers. That research showed that if farmers in the 2012 drought had been limited to the same agronomic choices they had in 1988, production would have been reduced by 25 percent. Monsanto has recently supported the extension of this work to understand the impact that changes in climate and water availability could have on North American crop production


NIKE

	At NIKE, everything we do begins with the athlete.  We know that climate-related issues like pollution may impact an athlete’s ability to perform.  That’s why NIKE, Inc. has been working for over a decade to cut energy use and greenhouse gas emissions throughout our value chain.  We will continue to harness the power of sustainable innovation to reduce our impacts and help protect the future of sport.  As part of this work NIKE, Inc. pledges to:


Reach 100% renewable energy in our owned or operated facilities by 2025.   NIKE, Inc. already sources renewable energy through on-site generation at some global facilities, and we are actively exploring advancing on-site renewable energy generation at additional owned or operated facilities. To supplement the on-site generation, we will look to procure off-site renewable energy.  This will include all owned or operated facilities where NIKE is responsible for energy purchasing decisions. Additionally, NIKE will continue the work that we have led for more than a decade with contract factories to help them implement programs to understand their energy use and climate impacts, increase their energy efficiency, and reduce their carbon emissions.

Participate in the Better Buildings Challenge, run by the U.S Department of Energy.  In line with the challenge criteria outlined by the USDOE, NIKE, Inc. has committed to reducing energy consumption over a ten year period in a majority of owned or operated facilities within the U.S. portfolio by 20% and will publicly share milestones of progress towards this goal.

Advance materials innovation.  Growing, creating and processing raw materials represents the greatest environmental impact across NIKE’s value chain.  NIKE recently launched a challenge with MIT Climate CoLab to find revolutionary new ideas for engaging industries, designers and consumers in valuing, demanding and adopting low-impact materials. We believe there are significant innovation opportunities ahead in this area and we are working to unlock the barriers to developing and scaling a new palette of more sustainable materials. 


NESTLE

	As a global nutrition, health and wellness company operating in 197 countries, we continue to build on our commitments by tackling climate change and decreasing the environmental impact of our business. Nestlé pledges to:


		Nestlé has worked to reduce GHG emissions in our factories for over 10 years. We are committed to a reduction of 35%, compared to a 2005 baseline, by end of 2015. 

		In May 2015, Nestlé announced 25 manufacturing factories in the U.S. achieved zero waste to landfill.  By the end of the year, 30% of our U.S. factories will achieve the landfill free status. Moving us closer to our commitment to be landfill free in all U.S. factories by 2020. 

		Nestlé has invested more than $61 million in energy efficiency efforts and has increased onsite consumption from renewable resources by 24% compared to 2010.  As a member of RE100, we are committed to identifying a path by 2017 for achieving 100% renewable electricity.  We will also develop a low-carbon energy plan for each US operating facility to use renewable energy where possible by 2016 and encourage the utilities where we operate to shift to low-carbon energy mix.  


	Globally, Nestlé plans a reduction of water use by 40% by the end of 2015, with a baseline year of 2005.  By 2016, we will implement projects in California facilities that will save 144 million gallons of water annually.

NOVOZYMES

	Novozymes biological solutions are efficient and sustainable in their effects.  With over 700 products that reduce energy needs, raw material requirements and environmental waste in their use by our customers, Novozymes is able through life cycle analysis to demonstrate CO2 emission reductions.


		Prior to 2015 Novozymes established long term goals to deliver 75 million tons of CO2 emission reductions annually through the use of our products.

		This year, Novozymes increased its ambition for emission reductions and now targets 100 million tons of CO2 reductions annually by 2020.


ONE3LED

	Our company, consisting of only 5000 square feet and 15 employees, has reduced our greenhouse gas emissions by 19 metric tons by implementing measures such as full LED lighting, daylight harvesting, and comprehensive recycling procedures. Co-founded by two young brothers from Missouri, One3LED is living proof that even the smallest businesses can do their part to help alleviate climate change.

	By its very definition, reduction of carbon emissions is saving the world. This is why we have dedicated our entire business model to helping other businesses do the same. Since 2012 One3LED has completed over 400 LED lighting projects across the U.S. reducing carbon emissions by an estimated 19,000 metric tons. The environmental comparable of this reduction is planting 15,000 acres of U.S. forests, taking 4,000 cars off the road, and erecting five industrial wind turbines. 

	Our commitment to action doesn't end with just businesses though. In 2014 One3LED created a non-profit giving program called “Change The Bulb” that focuses on bringing energy efficiency LED lighting to low-income families and nonprofit businesses. The program provides their homes and buildings with otherwise unattainable energy savings by replacing energy-wasting lighting with LED.

	Building on our previous commitments, One3LED pledges to continue our mission of energy efficiency and environmental advocacy and raise of efforts by 2019 through: 

	Reducing our own carbon footprint:


		Install solar panels on our building.

		Implement energy efficient HVAC systems.

		Use all recycled materials for our business cards, customer presentation materials, and office supplies. 


	Assisting other businesses:


		Double our greenhouse gas reduction assistance from 19,000 metric tons to 38,000.

		Dedicate a section of our website to carbon footprint reduction education.

		Expand our business model to encompass other clean energy technology such as lighting controls, HVAC, and water conservation systems. 

		Provide free lighting-based carbon footprint reduction seminars to businesses and organizations.


	Assisting low-income homes and non-profit organizations:


		Reach 1000 inner city families.

		Expand our work with Habitat for Humanity to an additional metropolitan area in the U.S each year.

		Continue to work with LED lighting manufactures to donate their overstock and/or previous generation products to inner city schools to use in their classrooms and gymnasiums. 

		Provide non-profit organizations with free energy-reduction lighting assessments.

		Continue the international Change The Bulb program with at least one mission per year.


PACIFIC ETHANOL

	Since committing to produce low carbon, renewable fuel in 2006, Pacific Ethanol has produced and sold a cumulative 1.2 billion gallons of ethanol with a carbon intensity value 50% lower than gasoline. Building on these accomplishments, Pacific Ethanol pledges to:


		By 2025, supply over 515 million gallons per year of low carbon ethanol to the market with a 50% reduction of GHG on a relative basis (g/MJ) compared to gasoline.    

		By 2025, produce a minimum of 50 million gallons per year of ultra-low carbon ethanol that will reduce GHG emissions by 90% on a relative basis (g/MJ) compared to gasoline.

		We further pledge to reduce our process carbon emissions by 40% by 2025, as part of an effort to develop long-term business plans that align with the deep decarbonization necessary to keep global average temperatures from rising less than 2C.


PEPSI-CO

	At PepsiCo, we recognize that limiting global warming to 2° Celsius is absolutely critical to our future and reiterate our call for collective action and our commitment to implementing solutions that will help achieve this goal.  PepsiCo pledges to:


		Utilizing PepsiCo’s Sustainable Farming Initiative, expand the use of sustainable farming practices to 500,000 acres of farmland used by our North American agricultural suppliers in our corn, oats, potato, and citrus supply chains by the end of 2016.

		Continue to implement hydrofluorocarbon (HFC)-free point-of-sale equipment (coolers, vending machines and fountain dispensers) to meet the goal that all of our new equipment in the U.S. will be HFC-free by 2020.

		Continue to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions from our global fleet through the use of electric, hybrid, compressed natural gas, alternative fuel vehicles and other fuel efficiency programs.

		Strive for zero deforestation in our business operations and global supply chain by 2020.

		Utilize the data generated and best practices learned at our facilities employing photovoltaic systems in the U.S. to help inform future solar installations and meet our goal of achieving an absolute greenhouse gas reduction.

		Strive to increase the amount of recycled content in our global packaging, as we have in our U.S. beverage packaging which included 111 million pounds of rPET in 2014.


PG&E

	As a provider of electricity and natural gas to millions of Californians, PG&E understands our responsibility to manage our carbon footprint, advance policies that put California and the country on a cost-effective path toward a low-carbon economy, and address the emerging need to adapt to changing climate conditions.  We also remain focused on advancing and providing customers—and our employees—with industry-leading tools and incentives to help them manage and reduce their energy use and capitalize on new, clean energy technologies.

	We want the actions we take and decisions we make regarding climate change to enable a better quality of life for our customers, communities and the planet. As a company with a mission rooted in public service, we have a distinct role to play in being a catalyst and advocate for clean energy innovation and a low-carbon economy, advancing economic growth and opportunity, and driving solutions to local and global environmental challenges.

	In support of our continued commitment to combating climate change, PG&E proposes to achieve the following by 2020:


Facilitate Deployment and Integration of Low-Carbon, Clean Energy Technologies:


Provide our nearly 16 million customers with an electricity supply that is more than 60 percent carbon-free, making it one of the cleanest electricity supply portfolios of any investor-owned utility in the country.

Support the implementation of the Clean Power Plan by working with the state of California and other stakeholders to ensure its effective implementation.

Plan a total grid investment of approximately $3 billion a year to both modernize the grid to make it more resilient and facilitate our vision of the Grid of Things™—a grid that will integrate distributed solar, energy storage, electric vehicles and other low-carbon technologies.

Expand the system-wide deployment of our mobile gas leak detection system that uses the most sophisticated, cutting-edge technology to find more natural gas leaks faster—helping to improve our ability to prioritize repairs and replacements, which enhances public safety and reduces the amount of methane released to the atmosphere.



Support Our Customers and Communities:


Continue to lead and innovate on energy efficiency by helping our customers save approximately 4,400 GWh of electricity and 90 million therms of natural gas, avoiding about the same amount of power used by 600,000 homes in PG&E’s service area.

Weatherize 500,000 homes to help low-income customers reduce energy use, better manage energy costs, and increase safety, health and comfort.

Facilitate the rapid adoption of rooftop solar installations by improving upon our current ability to interconnect a solar system in three days or less—among the fastest process times in the nation—to the point where our interconnection process is fully automated.

Dedicate more than $5 million over the next five years to continue to invest in partnerships that support clean energy deployment in underserved communities, including support for solar and renewable energy education and funding for solar panel installations in underserved communities, working in partnership with non-profit organizations.

Work with regulators to agree on programs that will allow continued acceleration of repairs and replacements to eliminate non-hazardous methane leaks in our natural gas distribution system to maintain a near zero “workable” leaks backlog and further reduce other minor leak backlogs.



Take Action in Our Operations and Encourage Our Employees to Do the Same:


Expand our fleet of alternative-fuel vehicles—one of the nation’s largest among electric and gas utilities—by investing at least one-third of our annual fleet procurement spend in electric vehicles, totaling more than $100 million.

Achieve top decile performance in facility energy and water reduction among industry peers—reducing the environmental footprint of our facilities (as reduced energy and water use translates into greenhouse gas savings), while also providing an enhanced workplace for our employees.

Build upon our existing employee incentive programs that offer discounts for rooftop solar installation and the purchase of electric vehicles to encourage employees to take action at their homes.




POET

	Since 2005, POET has reduced its greenhouse gas emissions intensity by nearly 14%. As one of the world’s largest producers of renewable fuel, POET pledges to:


		Produce over 1.7 billion gallons of low carbon ethanol annually, with a 35% reduction of greenhouse gas emissions compared to gasoline.

		Produce 820 million gallons of cellulosic ethanol by 2025 across the POET footprint at a 75% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions compared to gasoline.

		Develop long-term business plans that allow POET to be good stewards of the Earth by converting renewable resources to energy and other valuable goods as effectively as humanly possible.


PORTLAND GENERAL ELECTRIC

	PGE has been supportive of a national policy to reduce global warming for nearly a decade and is actively reducing its carbon emissions through specific actions. This global challenge should be addressed at the federal level by achieving real carbon reductions across all sectors of the economy. We are pursuing prudent, sustainable energy actions while maintaining system reliability and affordability for all our customers.

	As a provider of electricity to nearly 850,000 Oregonians, PGE pledges to:


		Implement our plan to end use of coal at Oregon’s only coal-fired power plant by December 31, 2020

		Add more than 800 megawatts of new renewable energy, on top of more than 700 megawatts of new wind generation we’ve already built, bringing our mix to one-third new and legacy renewable power in average hydro years by the end of 2025

		Optimize cost-effective integration of renewable resources by joining the western energy imbalance market in late 2017, acquiring an additional 5 megawatt hours’ worth of energy storage by 2020, and pursuing a water heater load-control and storage pilot program

		Advance our smart grid initiatives to improve the efficiency and resilience of the transmission and distribution system, including work on conservation voltage reduction, smart switches, and transformer replacements and spares

		Continue investments in our hydroelectric plants, along with habitat and water improvement projects, to retain access to this sustainable, carbon-free power for our customers

		Diversify our renewable portfolio with cost-effective solar projects, adding to our existing 16 megawatts of PGE-owned solar facilities and solar power purchase agreements while continuing our support for customer-side solar installations

		Use our integrated resource planning process to evaluate and pursue further climate-friendly resource strategies, including ongoing efforts to help customers make efficient use of energy
		

				Capture all cost-effective energy efficiency as our first resource choice

				Expand demand response and dynamic pricing to reduce the need for new generation



		Maintain high growth in our nationally top-ranked voluntary renewable power program and continue helping local governments and schools with “Green Power Community” strategies, sustainable buildings, solar projects and electric vehicle charging stations

		Promote vehicle electrification to help reduce carbon emissions from the transportation sector
		

				Install charging stations at all PGE sites and incent EV adoption by employees

				Fulfill our Edison Electric Institute pledge to devote 5 percent of our fleet vehicle budget to fleet electrification

				Continue working to ensure the driving public has access to charging infrastructure




PwC US

	In 2007, we set a carbon reduction goal and developed programs to cut our GHG emissions 20% (vs 2007 baseline). Since that time we have exceeded our reduction goal through various initiatives including building a LEED Gold-certified data center and virtualizing over 2,800 of its servers. This has also enabled us to deliver on our commitment to a modern, flexible and efficient workplace for our employees. As a result, we have reduced redundant square footage per employee, decreased our travel emissions, and put in place virtual collaboration technologies.

	 We are now extending our goal and pledging to:


		Reduce GHG emissions 45% by 2020 (vs. 2007 baseline),

		Power our workspaces with 100% renewable energy (RECs) while continuously improving their efficiency and achieving LEED certifications in our new buildouts, and

		Continue to support flexibility and deploy technologies that aid in reducing ground and air travel, purchase forestry offsets in order to continue to reduce the impact of our air travel, and support our local communities’ environmental conservation efforts.


PROCTER & GAMBLE

	Procter & Gamble (P&G) has had comprehensive efforts to address energy and climate underway for many years.  Our long term vision is to power our plants with 100% renewable energy.   As we continue to drive our efforts on climate change forward, P&G pledges to:


		Reduce absolute GHG emissions by 30% by 2020 (vs. a 2010 baseline) – a goal that is consistent with science-based methodologies that are helping companies align targets with climate science

		Achieve 30% Renewable Energy powering our plants globally by 2020

		As a significant action step towards this goal, we will manufacture our Fabric & Home Care products in North America with 100% wind power. To accomplish this, we have partnered with EDF RE to develop a new wind farm in Texas, to bring 100 MW renewable power on line, equivalent of eliminating 200,000 metric tons of GHG emissions per year. 

		Promote Cold Water Washing for machine laundering of clothes – with a target of 70% of all machine loads being done in cold water by 2020

		Build a traceable palm oil supply chain and ensure palm oil suppliers have implemented no deforestation policies and practices by 2020.

		Have 100% of the virgin wood fiber used in our tissue/towel and absorbent hygiene products be 3rd party certified by 2015.  Have 100% of our paper packaging be either recycled content or 3rd party certified virgin material by 2020.


QUALCOMM

	Qualcomm’s pledges to:


		Reduce absolute Scope 1 and 2 greenhouse gas emissions from global operations by 30%, compared to a 2014 baseline, by 2025


RICOH USA

	Ricoh pledges to:

Reduce greenhouse gas emissions:


		Advanced nations need to reduce their environmental impact to one-eighth the fiscal 2000 levels by 2050. Based on this, the Ricoh Group has established mid- and long-term environmental impact reduction goals for three key areas: energy conservation, resource conservation, and pollution prevention. Ricoh sets the target to reduce the company’s total lifecycle CO2 emissions by 30% by 2020 and by 87.5% by 2050 from the 2000 level.

		 As part of Ricoh’s commitment, we have continuously improved the energy efficiency of our products. As a result, the average energy consumption of our ENERGY STAR certified color Multifunctional Printers has decreased more than 70% over the last 7 years

		 In addition, we will install a solar farm system at our ENERGY STAR certified corporate facility in New Jersey by 2016 in order to partially offset its energy expenditure.


Resource Conservation and Recycling 


		Ricoh's goal is to reduce the new input of resources by 25% by 2020 and by 87.5% by 2050 from the 2007 level. To reach that goal, we utilize materials in the most effective way possible. We are making our products smaller and lighter, employing parts with longer lifecycles, recycling and reusing parts and products, and expanding the use of renewable resources.


SALESFORCE.COM

	At Salesforce, we believe in leveraging the power of our people and our products to reduce the impact that we and our customers have on the planet. From how we deliver our products to our focus on renewable energy, we incorporate sustainability into all aspects of our business.

	Salesforce’s multi-tenant cloud platform makes it possible to use a remarkably small number of servers as efficiently as possible. In fact, our core platform is 98% more carbon efficient on average than on-premise software.

	Salesforce pledges to:


		Work towards powering 100% of our global operations with renewable energy.

		Continue pursuing LEED certification for our largest office spaces and other innovative green building initiatives.

		Leverage our people, technology and resources to help environmental nonprofits around the world.


SCHNEIDER ELECTRIC

	At Schneider Electric we believe that energy and digital transitions provide new efficient solutions to shift in low carbon society and that access to energy is a basic human right.  We are committed to providing innovative solutions to address the energy paradox: balancing the planet’s carbon footprint with irrefutable human right to quality energy. Schneider Electric has delivered on its commitments to sustainability in the last four years with a series of actions for the company’s direct emissions and in the supply chain:


		Through the years, we have developed a solid portfolio of solutions on renewables, energy efficiency, and grid connections that facilitate energy transition

		Avoided 220,000 tons of CO2 in energy consumption, transportation and site emissions

		 Reduced water intensity of our most water intensive sites by 23 percent since 2011

		Increased the number of our products that are considered “Green Premium” and carry an ecolabel to 75 percent

		2.4 million underprivileged households equipped with energy solutions through Access to Energy program


	Because what is good for climate is good for economy, we recognize that delaying action on climate change will be costly in economic and human terms, while accelerating the transition to a low-carbon economy will produce multiple benefits with regard to sustainable economic growth, public health, resilience to natural disasters, and the health of the global environment.  We put forth our pledges as follows:


		Achieve 10 percent energy savings by the end of 2017  by reducing the company’s energy intensity 

		120,000 tons of CO2 avoided through end-of-life products by the end of 2017

		75 percent of products in R&D to be designed as Green Premium, with an ecolabel, and 75 percent of product revenue to come from Green Premium by the end of 2017

		Zero waste to landfill in 100 industrial sites by the end of 2017

		50 million underprivileged people obtaining lighting and communication systems with low carbon solutions by 2025 through the Access to Energy program

		Invest  over $11 billion over 10 years on R&D in innovation in sustainability


SIEMENS CORPORATION

	We put forth our pledge as follows:


		Siemens pledges to cut our global carbon footprint by 50% by 2020 and to reduce our net carbon emissions to zero by 2030.


	To achieve this goal, we have identified key emission reduction levers that will contribute to cutting CO2-emissions from our own operations and enable Siemens to become CO2-neutral in the long term. 


Energy Efficiency. Invest nearly $110 million globally in energy efficiency measures for our major factories within the next three years, including measures at a significant number of our total 84 Siemens sites in the U.S. Measures will include investments in buildings and production processes and will result in sustainable annual savings of more than $20 million in energy costs.  In Charlotte, at our LEED Gold certified advanced gas turbine manufacturing facility, we were able to cut costs and emissions both during construction and during operation by building the plant on a footprint requiring 18 percent less area than traditional production sites.  We have already begun to transition to LED light fixtures at many of our facilities in the U.S., including Charlotte, Bartlesville, Beltsville and Sacramento. 

Distributed Energy Systems. Implement innovative solutions at Siemens sites, combining power generation with storage solutions and intelligent energy management technologies. Our facility in Sacramento is already powered by up to 80 percent solar energy.  In Charlotte, the generator office building has a solar array on-site combined with energy management software.

Company Car Fleet. Focus on global roll-out of best practice examples for Siemens’ car fleet around the world, including clear emissions-related requirements, a bonus/malus system to set incentives for low emission cars, the development of an E-mobility solution concept, and the promotion of alternatives to driving such as the use of public transit and telecommuting.

Electricity Purchasing. Change our power purchasing guidelines and move towards a significantly cleaner power mix with a strong focus on renewable energies. As part of this commitment, we will buy electricity produced by our own technologies at our customers’ facilities. The world is transitioning away from fossil fuels and inefficient power grids.  With this approach, we will support the transition of the energy system towards coordinated solutions that lead to fewer emissions, more efficient power generation and less consumption of natural resources.

Supporting Our Customers’ Emissions Efficiency.  We will continue to support our customers in reducing energy costs and improving their CO2footprints with products and solutions from our Environmental Portfolio, which helped them save approximately 430 million metric tons of carbon dioxide in 2014. 


SONY CORPORATION OF AMERICA 

	We have established a long-term global environmental plan, Road to Zero, which aims for a zero environmental footprint throughout the lifecycle of our products and business activities by 2050. Curbing climate change is one of four perspectives we focus.   We have reduced over 1.2 million tons of greenhouse gas emissions from Sony facilities in fiscal 2014 compared to fiscal 2000, which is equivalent to approximately 46% reduction.  We have participated in the EPA Green Partner Partnership program since 2009 and are currently listed on the Top 30 Tech and Telecom list for the purchase of renewable energy in the U.S. We were also able to reduce the estimated annual energy consumption per product by 30% in fiscal 2014 compared to fiscal 2008.

	We put forth our pledges as follows:

	Working toward Road to Zero environmental plan, Sony Corporation of America on behalf of the entire Sony Group pledges to:


		Reduce greenhouse gas emissions from our facilities by 5%, compared to fiscal 2015 baseline, by fiscal 2020 on a global basis

		Reduce the annual energy consumption of its products* by an average of 30%, compared to fiscal 2013 baseline, by fiscal 2020. Reach out to over a few hundred million people worldwide through Sony's Entertainment contents, by fiscal 2020 to raise awareness and inspire action on the issues of environmental sustainability.

		Use and/or purchase renewable energy equivalent to 300,000 tons of CO2 emission by fiscal 2020 on a global basis.

		Enhance engagement of entire value chain by requesting major manufacturing partners and component suppliers cooperate by monitoring their CO2 emissions, water usage and waste.  Additionally, we will call on the major manufacturing partners to reduce these levels targeting 1% reduction in GHG emission and water usage intensity** per year. 


	* AC powered devices which operate the main function with energy input from the main power source (main electricity grid).

	** Environmental impact relative to the gross sales of product supplied to Sony.

STARBUCKS

	We put forth our pledges as follows:


		Build all company-owned stores to achieve LEED certification – To date, Starbucks has certified 669 stores in 19 countries, more than any other company in the world.

		Reduce energy use in company-owned Starbucks stores by 25%, compared to a 2008 baseline

		Reduce water use in company-owned Starbucks stores by 25%, compared to a 2008 baseline

		Purchase renewable energy equivalent to 100% of the electricity used in our company-owned stores

		Commit to purchase 100% ethically sourced coffee, through our C.A.F.E. Practices guidelines that increases impact through more efficient use of fertilizers, by preventing deforestation, and by reducing water and energy used in coffee processing. In addition, through our open sourced agronomy support, Starbucks ethically sourced coffee  strengthens coffee farmers’ ability to support their families and communities through increased coffee quality, more yield per hectare, and greater resilience to the changing climate conditions in some of the most vulnerable communities in the world

		Commit to invest $50M by 2020 towards a Global Farmer Fund that promotes coffee supply chain resilience and enables investments in sustainable infrastructure through low interest loans

		Continue our commitment, as one of the founding members of the BICEP coalition in the U.S., to advocate for smart climate policy at the Federal and International levels.


SYNGENTA/QCCP

	Cellerate Ethanol Technology, a partnership between Quad County Corn Processor and Syngenta pledges to:


		Enable conventional dry grind ethanol plants in the US to produce 609 million gallons per year of cellulosic ethanol by 2025.

		Cellerate produced gallons achieve a >100% GHG reduction compared to gasoline (energy equivalent)


TARGET

	Since 2010, Target has reduced greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) by improving energy efficiency, investing in renewable energy, and lowering our overall hydrofluorocarbon impact. These programs have successfully reduced our GHG emissions by 9% since 2010 and eliminated 550,000 metric tons of CO2e across our building portfolio. Target has established the following goals to support our pledge:


		Model leadership in energy efficiency by achieving ENERGY STAR certification in 80% of our buildings by 2020. These efforts will eliminate 9,000 metric tons of GHG emissions from our stores. 

		10 percent reduction in energy intensity-per-square-foot by 2020 for our stores against a baseline of 2010. These efforts will eliminate 271,500 metric tons of GHG emissions from our stores. To support this pledge, Target joined the Indoor Lighting Campaign launched in 2015, led by the US Department of Energy Better Building Alliance.

		Dramatically increase renewable energy at Target by increasing the number of solar rooftop panels by over 2000% since 2010 to 500 stores and distribution centers by 2020. Solar panels generate approximately one-third of energy use per building.
		

				Expand investment in offsite renewable energy to complement onsite renewables. To facilitate this effort, Target is partnering with a group of stakeholders to encourage utilities to make renewables more widely available to customers.

				Drive implementation of hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) free refrigerants in our food distribution centers and stand-alone refrigerated display cases. Over the last two years, Target has opened two new food distribution centers that employ ammonia, an HFC-free refrigerant, which has resulted in an annual reduction of 900 metric tons of CO2e.

				Reduce water use by 10 percent per square foot by 2020 for our stores against a baseline of 2010. 

				Divert 70% of retail waste from landfill through reuse or recycle programs by 2020

				Engage additional vendors and product categories in our Clean by Design program. The program includes initiatives our supply chain can implement to reduce wastewater effluent, water use, energy and emissions around the world.




TRI-GLOBAL ENERGY

	Building on the 6,200 megawatts of wind power projects that are now under development, under construction or in operation, Tri Global Energy is investing in renewable power diversification with the addition of a solar division and the acquisition of a solar energy company.  Accordingly, we put forth our pledges as follows:


		Initiate development of an additional 600-900 megawatts of new utility-scale wind generation projects annually through 2018, not only in West Texas and Eastern New  Mexico where TGE’s 15 wind generation projects are located, but expanding our reach to locations across the U.S. Tri Global Energy is the leading developer of wind energy in Texas.

		Transition more than 500 megawatts of additional wind capacity into the construction and operations phase annually through 2018 thus increasing renewable capacity available for grid integration and electricity usage.

		Install solar photovoltaic systems on 1,000 commercial and 8,000 residential roof-tops over the next five years for homeowners, non-profit groups and other entities replacing the energy output of carbon-intense plants. 


UNILEVER

	Unilever United States and our 8,000 employees are proud to manufacture iconic brands including Dove, Lipton, Ben & Jerrys, Vaseline and Hellmann’s at 13 plants across the United States.

	Urgent action is needed to combat climate change. As part of the Unilever Sustainable Living Plan launched in 2010, Unilever is committed to decoupling our growth from its environmental footprint. We are deepening our efforts to lower our GHG impact from sourcing and manufacturing, and through innovation and behavior change. We will use our scale, influence and resources to create transformational change.

	As of 2015, our progress includes:


		We have achieved 100% renewable electricity procurement for our US facilities through a long-term power purchase agreement with NRG, including the annual purchase of 90 megawatts of energy from a Texas wind farm. 

		We have achieved our target of zero nonhazardous waste to landfill across our US factory network. Waste prevention and recycling divert organic wastes from landfills, reducing the methane released when those materials decompose.

		In 2012 in the US, we reduced water abstraction per ton of production by 26% when compared to a 2008 baseline. Our Covington, Tennessee ice cream facility reduced annual water abstraction by 75% through process improvements while increasing the volume of ice cream produced.

		In 2012, our North American logistics operations delivered a 7.8% improvement in CO2 efficiency compared to our 2010 baseline.

		As of 2014, we have deployed 3761 HFC-free refrigeration cabinets in the United States using natural refrigerant technology.


	We put forth our pledges as follows:


		We have committed to achieving zero net deforestation associated with four commodities – palm oil, soy, paper and board, and beef – no later than 2020. This commitment also extends to our tea businesses and supply chains.

		Globally, by 2020, CO2 emissions from electricity from our factories will be at or below 2008 levels despite significantly higher volumes. CO2 from energy in manufacturing has been reduced by 37% per ton of production respectively since 2008. This is just the latest step in a long journey, in fact, compared to 1995, this represents a 64% reduction in absolute terms.

		We have reached 100% renewable energy procurement for our US facilities and we are committed to move to on-site and directed off-site sources for 100% of our US energy needs by 2020.

		We have joined the RE100 campaign, committing to 100% renewable electricity in our sites around the world, not just the US.  We’ve already achieved that in Europe.

		We will continue to invest and deploy innovative technologies like dry shampoo, which we estimate that compared to washing with heated water, reduces GHG emissions by around 90% per consumer use.


UPS

	In 2013, successful execution of our global greenhouse gas strategy at UPS enabled us to exceed a 10 percent reduction in carbon intensity three years ahead of our 2016 goal. In 2014, we achieved a 14.1 percent reduction in our carbon intensity versus a 2007 baseline as a result of successfully executing carbon reduction strategies in our ground and air fleet. 

	Accordingly, UPS pledges:


		To double our goal to a 20 percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020, as measured by our UPS Transportation Intensity Index, off a 2007 baseline. The Transportation Intensity Index normalizes our greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to business volume, for instance by reducing the amount of fuel required to travel a given distance or to carry a given amount of cargo or packages; covers 96 percent of our worldwide Scope 1 and Scope 2 CO2e emissions; and combines data from separate carbon intensity metrics associated with our business segments.

		To achieve by 2017 a cumulative billion miles of package or freight movement in our alternative fuel/technology truck fleet, which we expect will number over 7,700 trucks by the end of 2015.


	Our UPS plan includes:


		Network and mode optimization to minimize the miles traveled and energy consumed.

		Investments in fuel-saving technologies to reduce our dependency on petroleum-based fuels.

		Investments in alternative fuel vehicles to help offset the use of conventional petroleum fuels

		Energy conservation through facility design, operational practices, renewable energy, and retrofitting.


	Accurate, verified disclosure of global greenhouse gas emissions data per recognized standards.

WALMART

	At Walmart, we believe climate change is an urgent and pressing challenge, and we must all do our part to reduce, avoid and mitigate the impact of rising greenhouse gas (GHG) levels.  We remain committed to our role in accelerating the transition to a sustainable future.

	In 2014, we operated with 9 percent less energy per square foot compared with our 2010 baseline and 26 percent of our electricity used was generated from renewable sources - keeping us on track toward our goal of being powered by 100 percent renewable energy. Additionally, we’ve reduced the GHG intensity of our operations (Scope 1 and 2) for eight consecutive years, we’re on track to hold our absolute emissions flat over this decade, even with our continued growth as a company, and working with our suppliers, we’re on track to exceed our 2015 goal of eliminating 20 million metric tons of GHG emissions from our supply chain.

	Walmart is committed to collaborating with suppliers, NGOs, governments and other corporate partners to continue to enhance the sustainability of our operations and product supply chains for people and the planet.

	Walmart puts forth our pledges as follows:


		Drive the production or procurement of 7 billion kilowatt hours (kWh) of renewable energy globally by Dec. 31, 2020 – an increase of more than 600 percent versus our 2010 baseline. 

		Double the number of on-site solar energy projects at our U.S. stores, Sam’s Clubs and distribution centers by 2020, compared with our 2013 baseline.

		Reduce the total kWh-per-square-foot energy intensity required to power our buildings around the world by 20 percent by 2020 versus our 2010 baseline.

		Gain increasing visibility into key metrics regarding yields, water usage and GHGs in our food supply chains by 2025. Walmart is now working with suppliers, representing approximately 70% of food sales, to report their yield, water and GHG footprints all the way back to the farm.

		Establish joint agricultural partnerships with 17 suppliers, cooperatives and service providers on 23 million acres of land in the U.S. and Canada, with the potential to reduce 11 million metric tons of GHG by 2020.


	Achieve zero net deforestation in product sourcing by 2020 as part of The Consumer Goods Forum.

THE WALT DISNEY COMPANY

	Disney has a long-term goal of zero net greenhouse gas emissions. 


		By 2020, Disney will reduce net emissions by 50% from 2012 levels by following the hierarchy of avoiding emissions, reducing emissions through efficiencies, replacing high-carbon fuels with low-carbon alternatives, and then using certified offsets for our remaining emissions. 

		Disney has also put an internal price on carbon, which has helped inspire innovation within the company, helped integrate the consideration of carbon emissions into decision-making, and resulted in the protection or rehabilitation of over 156,000 acres of forests.

		As of 2014, Disney has decreased net emissions by 31% from 2012 levels.


XEROX CORPORATION

	Xerox has a long-standing commitment to environmental sustainability.  In 2003, we made a public commitment to reduce Green House Gas (GHG) emissions by joining the U.S. EPA Climate Leaders program and launching an internal program known as Energy Challenge 2012; a ten-year initiative. We exceeded our initial expectations, set subsequent goals and ultimately cut energy consumption by 31% and GHG emissions by 42% - that’s 210,000 tons of carbon dioxide equivalents (CO2e).

	Building on our strategic focus areas to reduce energy use and protect the climate; preserve the world’s forests and biodiversity; preserve clean air and water; and prevent and manage waste,

	XEROX CORPORATION pledges to:


		Reduce GHG emissions and energy consumption 20% by Y2020, from a Y2012 baseline, a science-based target commitment made in conjunction with the Carbon Disclosure Project’s Road to Paris initiative;

		Achieve 20% renewable usage by Y2020 with a goal of reaching 100% by 2050;

		Provide our customers, from the transportation sector to managed print services, with enhanced opportunities to reduce their environmental footprint; and

		Launch 100% of eligible new products in conformance with current applicable ENERGY STAR® specifications.


	Some of the projects Xerox is currently engaged in include:


		Teaming with the University of Michigan and other companies to create “MCity” – a 32-acre simulated urban environment to enable mobility developers to test the capabilities of connected and automated vehicles and systems;


	Combining a number of transportation solutions to enhance urban mobility, such as “Cloud Park,” which uses cameras and computers to direct drivers to open parking spots; the Merge® smart parking system, which uses occupancy data from meters and sensors to vary pricing and hence availability; and vehicle passenger detection to facilitate wide use of HOV/HOT lanes. The result is increasing traffic flow and decreasing time spent searching for a parking place, allowing for reduced fuel usage and improved air quality.


		Developing the Xerox Print Awareness Tool®, which provides end-users with graphical displays of their print usage as well as “eco-tips” to enhance sustainability awareness and choices.

		Continuing to refine and expand the use of our proprietary Emulsion Aggregation (EA) Toner, which utilizes ultra low-melt technology to allow customers to photocopy with more sustainable materials, utilize less electricity and reduce their GHG emissions in comparison to conventional toner.

