ATLAPA Convention Center
	Panama City, Panama
2:46 P.M. EST
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  This is obviously a historic meeting.  The history between the United States and Cuba is obviously complicated, and over the years a lot of mistrust has developed.  But during the course of the last several months, there have been contacts between the U.S. and the Cuban government.  And in December, as a consequence of some of the groundwork that had been laid, both myself and President Castro announced a significant change in policy and the relationship between our two governments.
I think that after 50 years of policy that had not changed on the part of the United States, it was my belief that it was time to try something new, that it was important for us to engage more directly with the Cuban government and the Cuban people.  And as a consequence, I think we are now in a position to move on a path towards the future, and leave behind some of the circumstances of the past that have made it so difficult, I think, for our countries to communicate.
Already we’ve seen majorities of the American people and the Cuban people respond positively to this change.  And I truly believe that as more exchanges take place, more commerce and interactions resume between the United States and Cuba, that the deep connections between the Cuban people and the American people will reflect itself in a more positive and constructive relationship between our governments.
Now, obviously there are still going to be deep and significant differences between our two governments.  We will continue to try to lift up concerns around democracy and human rights.  And as you heard from President Castro’s passionate speech this morning, they will lift up concerns about U.S. policy as well. 
But I think what we have both concluded is that we can disagree with the spirit of respect and civility, and that over time it is possible for us to turn the page and develop a new relationship in our two countries.
And some of our immediate tasks include normalizing diplomatic relations and ultimately opening an embassy in Havana, and Cuba being able to open an embassy in Washington, D.C. so that our diplomats are able to interact on a more regular basis.
So I want to thank President Castro for the spirit of openness and courtesy that he has shown during our interactions.  And I think if we can build on this spirit of mutual respect and candidness, that over time we will see not just a transformation in the relationship between our two countries, but a positive impact throughout the hemisphere and the world.
And President Castro earlier today spoke about the significant hardships that the people of Cuba have undergone over many decades.  I can say with all sincerity that the essence of my policy is to do whatever I can to make sure that the people of Cuba are able to prosper and live in freedom and security, and enjoy a connection with the world where their incredible talents and ingenuity and hard work can thrive.
PRESIDENT CASTRO:  (As interpreted.)  Well, Mr. President, friends from the press, we have been making long speeches and listening to many long speeches too, so I do not want to abuse the time of President Obama or your time.
I think that what President Obama has just said, it’s practically the same as we feel about the topics, including human rights, freedom of the press.  We have said on previous occasions to some American friends that we are willing to discuss every issue between the United States and Cuba.  We are willing to discuss about those issues that I have mentioned and about many others, as these -- both in Cuba but also in the United States. 
I think that everything can be on the table.  I think that we can do it, as President Obama has just said, with respect for the ideas of the other.  We could be persuaded of some things; of others, we might not be persuaded.  But when I say that I agree with everything that the President has just said, I include that we have agreed to disagree.  No one should entertain illusions.  It is true that we have many differences.  Our countries have a long and complicated history, but we are willing to make progress in the way the President has described. 
We can develop a friendship between our two peoples.  We shall continue advancing in the meetings which are taking place in order to reestablish relations between our countries.  We shall open our embassies.  We shall visit each other, having exchanges, people to people.  And all that matters is what those neighbors can do; we are close neighbors, and there are many things that we can have.
So we are willing to discuss everything, but we need to be patient -- very patient.  Some things we will agree on; others we will disagree.  The pace of life at the present moment in the world, it’s very fast.  We might disagree on something today on which we could agree tomorrow.  And we hope that our closest assistants -- part of them are here with us today -- we hope that they will follow the instructions of both Presidents. 
Thank you so much.
END
	2:57 P.M. EST
At the 7th Summit of the Americas in Panama City, Panama, President Obama highlighted the commitment of the United States to upholding the essential role independent civil society and the private sector play in contributing to a shared democratic agenda that benefits all of the people of the Americas.
The 2015 Summit of the Americas demonstrated the global importance of the region and the progress we have made over the last two decades to improve people’s lives.  Our region’s leaders must continue to work together, focusing on pressing issues that need our attention and action, so that we redouble our commitment to a more prosperous, safe, sustainable, equal, and democratic Western Hemisphere.
President Obama worked with his counterparts to build on partnerships introduced at the 2009 Summit in Trinidad and Tobago and the 2012 Summit in Colombia to launch a series of initiatives:
Democracy and Citizen Participation
In his meeting with civil society leaders, the President announced the support of the United States for civil society’s effort to establish a permanent public consultative mechanism and role in the Summits of the Americas.


		The President further highlighted the importance of updating transparency laws in the region to strengthen access to information and public disclosure regimes in law and practice, and making a priority transparent and accountable public institutions in the post-2015 development agenda.  He supported Mexico’s proposal to establish a network of “Open Government Reformers.”

Economic Growth and Opportunity
Building from the Broadband Partnership of the Americas that President Obama launched in 2012, the United States will work with its partners to increase the adoption of fixed and mobile broadband service the deployment of broadband infrastructure as necessary.


		The United States joined a shared commitment among the region’s World Trade Organization (WTO) Members to accept the Trade Facilitation Agreement prior to the December 2015 WTO Ministerial by submitting letters of acceptance to the WTO so that the agreement can enter into force.

		In his meeting with the Americas Business Dialogue at the 2nd CEO Summit of the Americas, President Obama encouraged governments and business to work together to increase economic opportunities for youth, particularly in Central America.  He announced $68 million in new programs to increase training, educational, and job opportunities for at-risk youth in Central America and the Caribbean. 

		The President emphasized the contribution small businesses make to creating jobs and growth, particularly for women.  President Obama highlighted successes of the Small Business Network of the Americas (SBNA) and Women’s Entrepreneurship in the Americas initiatives since 2012 and announced the United States will work with its partners to expand SBNA so that it can independently help micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises, and entrepreneurs, and increase opportunities for growth.

		President Obama also encouraged the region’s business leaders to get involved in advancing the 100,000 Strong in the Americas initiative to prepare young people with the linguistic and cultural competencies they will need to succeed in our increasingly interconnected region.  The President applauded those of his counterparts who have adopted their own national plans to increase student exchanges within the hemisphere, and urged those who have not, to do so as well.

Clean and Sustainable Energy Future
In his meeting with leaders, the President sought to ensure that all countries in the hemisphere have open access to climate data and information that enhance their capabilities for resilient development by 2020.  The United States will contribute to achieving the President’s goal by applying for accreditation as a Regional Climate Center by the end of 2015.


		President Obama addressed the challenge of combating climate change and securing a clean energy future by setting ambitious targets for climate-resilient energy development.  The President and several leaders committed double the collective share of non-hydro renewable energy (including solar, wind, geothermal, and sustainable, non-traditional biomass) in the Americas’ electricity mix by 2030.

		The President also called on leaders to aggressively phase out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies, and recommended the 2015 meeting of the Energy and Climate Partnership of the Americas consider additional fossil fuel subsidy reforms. 

		The President welcomed the leadership of other governments that seek to share their expertise in a spirit of partnership to strengthen citizen security, fight transnational organized crime, improve the health of our people, and coordinate on disaster response.

 
The United States condemns the life sentence issued today in Egypt against American citizen Mohamed Soltan.  We call for Mr. Soltan's immediate release from prison.  We remain deeply concerned about Mr. Soltan's health, which has suffered during his 20 month-long incarceration.  The President is deeply committed to the welfare of all U.S. citizens abroad and we will ensure that Mr. Soltan continues to receive consular support until he can return safely to the United States, per his wishes.
