
“Of course, nothing helps families make ends meet like higher wages...We still need to make sure employees get the overtime they’ve earned.” 

– President Barack Obama, State of the Union Address, January 20, 2015

	Middle class economics means that a hard day’s work should lead to a fair day’s pay.  For much of the past century, a cornerstone of that promise has been the 40-hour workweek.  But for decades, industry lobbyists have bottled up efforts to keep these rules up to date, leaving millions of Americans working long hours, and taking them away from their families without the overtime pay that they have earned. Business owners who treat their employees fairly are being undercut by competitors who don’t.

	Today, President Obama announced that the Department of Labor will propose extending overtime pay to nearly 5 million workers. The proposal would guarantee overtime pay to most salaried workers earning less than an estimated $50,440 next year. The number of workers in each state who would be affected by this proposal can be found here.

	The salary threshold guarantees overtime for most salaried workers who fall below it, but it is eroded by inflation every year.  It has only been updated once since the 1970s, when the Bush Administration published a weak rule with the strong support of industry.  Today, the salary threshold remains at $23,660 ($455 per week), which is below the poverty threshold for a family of four, and only 8 percent of full-time salaried workers fall below it.

	President Obama directed the Secretary of Labor to update regulations relating to who qualifies for overtime pay so that they once again reflect the intent of the Fair Labor Standards Act, and to simplify the rules so they’re easier for workers and businesses to understand and apply.  Following months of extensive consultations with employers, workers, unions, and other stakeholders, the Department of Labor developed a proposal that would:


		Raise the threshold under which most salaried workers are guaranteed overtime to equal the 40th percentile of weekly earnings for full-time salaried workers.  As proposed, this would raise the salary threshold from $455 a week ($23,660 a year) – below the poverty threshold for a family of four – to a projected level of $970 a week ($50,440 a year) in 2016.

		Extend overtime pay and the minimum wage to nearly 5 million workers within the first year of its implementation, of which 56 percent are women and 53 percent have at least a college degree. 

		Provide greater clarity for millions more workers so they – and their employers – can determine more easily if they should be receiving overtime pay.

		Prevent a future erosion of overtime and ensure greater predictability by automatically updating the salary threshold based on inflation or wage growth over time.


	The proposal does not include specific regulatory changes to the so-called “duties test” that determines whether salaried workers earning more than the threshold are entitled to an exemption from overtime rules.  Hourly workers would generally continue to receive overtime pay, as they do under current rules.  Consistent with the normal rulemaking process, when the Department of Labor’s Notice of Proposed Rulemaking is published in the coming days, there will be opportunities to submit comments in writing. Only after reviewing and considering all the comments will the Department determine what to include in a final rule next year.

Overtime Pay Has Eroded, Failing Millions of Workers

For much of the 20th century, most Americans enjoyed overtime pay. Since 1938, the Fair Labor Standards Act has required businesses to pay not less than a minimum wage for all hours worked and time-and-a-half for any hours worked in excess of 40 hours per week. These rules apply to most hourly and salaried workers, with exceptions including one for executive, administrative, and professional workers. In 1975, 62 percent of full-time salaried workers, including a majority of college graduates, were eligible for overtime pay.

But today, far fewer workers qualify for overtime pay. The exception for executive, administrative, and professional employees has grown so large that a large majority of salaried workers are denied overtime.  The salary threshold, which for most salaried workers determines whether they are guaranteed overtime or not, has been changed only twice in the last 40 years and now covers far fewer workers due to inflation.  Today, the salary threshold remains at $23,660 ($455 per week), which is below the poverty threshold for a family of four, and only 8 percent of full-time salaried workers fall below it. Workers above this level may be denied overtime even if they spend only a small share of their time on professional, executive, or administrative activities. For example, a convenience store manager, fast food assistant manager, or office worker may be expected to work 50 or 60 hours a week or more, making barely enough to keep a family out of poverty, and not receiving a dime of overtime pay.  For some of these employees, not receiving overtime pay means that they are not even receiving the minimum wage when all of their hours of overtime are taken into account.

	This proposed rule will help promote higher take-home pay and allow workers to better balance their work and family obligations. In so doing, it will help shore up the middle class and provide an easier pathway for those aspiring to share in the standard of living it affords.

Building on Additional Efforts to Grow the Middle Class

	Modernizing our outdated overtime rules is just one piece of the President’s plan to support America’s workers and grow the middle class. The President believes that all Americans should have the opportunity to succeed in our global economy and all working families should be able to afford the cornerstones of economic security.  Middle-out economics has helped to make America stronger over the past six years, with our businesses creating 12.6 million new jobs over 63 straight months of job growth. President Obama is pursuing policies that will ensure a growing economy— one with hard work, higher wages, higher incomes, fairer pay for women, workplace flexibility for parents, affordable health insurance and adequate retirement benefits.

Higher Wages


		President Obama has called on Congress to raise the national minimum wage, and took action by signing an Executive Order to raise the minimum wage to $10.10 for workers on new federal contracts.  Since early 2013, when the President first called for a minimum wage increase, 17 states and the District of Columbia have passed increases to their minimum wage, which will benefit about 7 million workers.  Many other cities and localities, such as Chicago and Los Angeles, have also passed minimum wage increases, while businesses across the country have taken steps on their own to raise wages for their workers.


Tax Cuts for the Middle-Class


		In his first term, President Obama cut taxes for the average middle-class family by $3,600.  The American Taxpayer Relief Act, which President Obama signed into law in 2012, permanently lowered income tax rates for 98 percent of American workers.

		President Obama has extended and continues to fight for 2009 improvements to the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and the Child Tax Credit (CTC), which are helping 16 million families make ends meet.


College Affordability


		Over the past six years, the President and Congress have provided millions of low-income and middle class families across the country access to college by increasing the maximum Pell Grant award by $1,000, and total funding by 70 percent.

		Families putting a child through college became eligible for as much as $10,000 of additional help over four years from the President’s American Opportunity Tax Credit, the equivalent of nearly a 30-percent discount on tuition at a typical state university.

		Taken together, these scholarships will provide students and families $50 billion in aid next year to help them afford college.


Equal Pay


		The first bill President Obama signed into law was the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Restoration Act, which empowers women to recover wages lost to discrimination by extending the time period in which an employee can file a claim. The President continues to advocate for passage of the Paycheck Fairness Act, common sense legislation that would give women additional tools to fight pay discrimination.

		In April 2014, the President signed two executive actions strengthening equal pay laws: an Executive Order prohibiting federal contractors from retaliating against employees who choose to discuss their compensation and a Presidential Memorandum instructing the Secretary of Labor to establish new regulations requiring federal contractors to submit summary data on compensation paid to their employees, including data by sex and race. The Department of Labor will use the data to encourage compliance with equal pay laws and to target enforcement more effectively.


Workplace Flexibility


		In June 2014, the White House held the first-ever Summit on Working Families, elevating a national conversation about making today’s workplaces work for everyone, and signed a Presidential Memorandum to enhance workplace flexibilities and work-life balances for federal employees. He has also urged Congress to pass the Healthy Families Act, which would allow most Americans to earn up to seven paid sick days a year.


Promoting Fair Pay and Safe Workplaces


		In July 2014, President Obama signed an Executive Order that helps agencies better take into account prospective federal contractors’ labor records when awarding contracts.  It also ensures that federal contract workers are given the necessary information each pay period to verify the accuracy of their paycheck and workers who may have been sexually assaulted or had their civil rights violated get their day in court by putting an end to certain mandatory arbitration agreements.


Affordable Health Insurance


		Five years ago, the Affordable Care Act became law — opening the doors to affordable, quality health insurance for millions of people. Today:

		

				More than 16 million Americans have gained health coverage,

				Up to 30 million young adults can no longer be denied coverage for a pre-existing condition,

				105 million Americans no longer have a lifetime limit on their health coverage,

				137 million Americans are guaranteed preventative care coverage, and

				The nation’s uninsured rate now stands at its lowest level ever.




Security in Retirement


		In February 2015, the Department of Labor published a proposed rule protecting retirement savers by ensuring that investment advisors are free from conflicts that prevent them from acting in the best interests of their clients.  This is a common sense rule that protects those saving for retirement from being steered into investments that are in their advisors’ financial interest but not theirs. 


	Today President Barack Obama hosted Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff at the White House.  Their meeting underscored the long-standing and increasingly diverse partnership between the United States and Brazil, which is rooted in a shared commitment to expand inclusive economic growth and prosperity; promote international peace and security and respect for human rights; strengthen bilateral defense and security cooperation; and deepen our people-to-people ties through exchanges in education, energy, health, science and technology, and innovation.  The visit highlighted our cooperation in the following areas:

Expanding Economic Growth and Prosperity


Social Security Agreement:  The United States and Brazil seek to ease the burden on companies in order to facilitate job creation and growth, while enhancing the protection of our workers.  To support this effort, the United States and Brazil have signed a Social Security Totalization agreement.  This agreement will eliminate dual Social Security contributions, which occur when a worker from one country works in another country.  It will also close the gaps in benefit protections for workers who divide their careers between the United States and Brazil.  With trade and investment rapidly growing between our two countries, the United States estimates that this agreement will save U.S. and Brazilian companies more than $900 million over the first six years. 

Standards Alignment to Promote Trade:  Recognizing the importance of aligning standards and standards-related work to increasing trade and investment, the United States Department of Commerce and the Brazilian Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade signed a memorandum of intent (MOI) to expand cooperation between the two ministries on standards and conformity assessment.  The MOI emphasizes work with relevant public and private stakeholders, including U.S. and Brazilian standards developing organizations and trade associations, to promote cooperation on standards and conformity assessment to stimulate development and competitiveness. 

Mutual Beef Market Access:  The United States and Brazil are two of the world’s largest agricultural producers and exporters, and we agreed to expand bilateral beef trade by undertaking science-based risk rulemaking in 2013.  The United States of Department of Agriculture is amending its regulations to allow the importation of fresh beef from Brazil under specific conditions that mitigate the risk of foot-and-mouth disease.  Additionally, the United States and Brazil are working to ensure that any Brazilian meat imported into the United States for human consumption complies with U.S. public health and food safety regulations.  Brazil is taking action to expand U.S. beef access in the near future.

Providing United States Passenger Service System to LATAM Airlines:  Supported by a United States Trade and Development Agency training grant for TAM Airlines, U.S. travel technology provider Sabre will provide its passenger service system to LATAM Airlines Group.  In 2012, the LATAM Airlines Group was formed by the Chile-based airline, LAN, and the Brazil-based airline, TAM.  TAM, LAN, and their affiliates will now operate on Sabre’s technology across LATAM’s entire global network.  LAN is a long-time Sabre customer and TAM’s migration to Sabre’s platform will represent the largest-ever implementation of a passenger service system for Latin America’s commercial aviation industry.  Sabre’s comprehensive software and data solutions will help these airlines market themselves, sell products, serve customers and operate more efficiently and consistently across their entire network.   These solutions empower airlines to make smarter operational decisions as well as personalize and retail their products to travelers. 

Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act:  The United States welcomes the entry into force of the agreement between the United States and Brazil to implement the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA).  The FATCA agreement will improve international tax compliance and combat offshore tax evasion by facilitating an annual automatic exchange, on a reciprocal basis, of specific account holder information that financial institutions in each country will report to their own governments as required under local law.  The first exchange of information is scheduled to occur in September 2015.

Mutual Recognition Joint Work Plan:  The United States Department of Homeland Security and Brazil’s Secretariat of the Federal Revenue have signed a Joint Work Plan Regarding Mutual Recognition of Their Respective Authorized Economic Operator Programs.  Under the plan, both countries will work toward recognizing the equivalency of the United States and Brazil’s security protocols to facilitate processing for low-risk cargo and promote greater trade. 

Promoting Entrepreneurship and the Growth of Small-and-Medium-Sized Enterprises:  The United States and Brazil share the view that helping small businesses grow and entrepreneurs start new companies is key to creating jobs and ensuring inclusive economic growth.  To that end, the United States and Brazil have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Promoting Entrepreneurship and the Growth of Micro-and-Small-Sized Enterprises.  Under the MOU, the countries will advance the objectives of the Small Business Network of the Americas to foster greater connections among the thousands of business service providers and the millions of businesses they serve annually.  The two countries will also promote entrepreneurship among women and expand opportunities for women-owned businesses through the Women’s Entrepreneurship in the Americas Initiative.

Worksharing on Patents:  Recognizing the value of collaboration on patents to promote innovation in the United States and Brazil, the United States Department of Commerce and Brazil’s Ministry for Development, Industry and Foreign Trade signed a Joint Statement on Patent Worksharing to improve efficiencies in the patent application process.

Single Window Exchanges:  Recognizing the robust engagement under the United States-Brazil Commercial Dialogue and the efforts of both countries to facilitate trade, the United States and Brazil will exchange lessons learned and best practices as each country develops and deploys their respective single window systems for international trade.  This engagement, which will be initiated before the end of 2015, will support each country’s efforts to use automated capabilities and modernized trade processes to further facilitate lawful trade while identifying illicit or non-compliant shipments.

Support for Financial Market Transactions:  Through collaborations between private sector entities and National Institute of Standards and Technology on time and frequency standards, Brazilian financial markets will soon have access to precision network timing at the 50 microsecond level to better order and track electronic financial transactions.  Financial markets across the world increasingly rely on automated, high-speed electronic trading where even microseconds make big differences in outcomes.  Traders and regulators need reliable, auditable timing references to ensure transactions are made in the proper sequence, at the agreed upon times.  Having more reliable transactions should be of benefit to both countries’ citizens and prevent losses in revenue.


Leading Together on Global, Multilateral, and Regional Issues


Global Climate Change:  The United States and Brazil have reduced absolute greenhouse gas emissions more than any other countries in the world since 2005 and are taking additional significant steps to reduce emissions. Presidents Obama and Rousseff are committed to working closely together to resolve potential obstacles towards an ambitious agreement in the Paris climate negotiations this December.  Brazil previewed its post-2020 climate target, or intended nationally determined contribution,  which will be based on the implementation of broad policies, including those in the forestry, land-use, industrial, and energy sectors and will represent Brazil’s highest possible effort beyond its current actions.  Brazil announced that it will pursue policies aimed at eliminating illegal deforestation and will restore and reforest 12 million hectares of forests by 2030.  The United States reaffirmed its intent to achieve an economy-wide target of reducing its emissions by 26-28 percent below 2005 levels in 2005 2025* and to make best efforts to reduce its emissions by 28 percent.  The United States and Brazil announced a joint goal of increasing the share of renewables – beyond hydropower – in their respective electricity generation mixes to the level of 20 percent by 2030.  This is highly ambitious for both countries.  For the United States, this will represent nearly a tripling of the current share of non-hydro renewables in the grid, and more than a doubling for Brazil.  To demonstrate the depth of the joint commitment to this important issue, the United States and Brazil launched a Joint Climate Change Initiative, including a Climate Change Working Group that will focus on enhancing cooperation on sustainable land use, clean energy, and climate adaptation.

Human Rights and Social Inclusion:  The United States and Brazil are establishing a Global Human Rights Working Group under the auspices of our Global Partnership Dialogue to enhance collaboration on human rights issues in multilateral fora.  In addition to ongoing efforts to fight racial and ethnic discrimination and advance gender equality, the United States and Brazil will work together at the United Nations Human Rights Council to promote the human rights of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender persons, and pursue cooperation on defending freedom of expression and advocating for citizens with disabilities. 

Food Security Support in Africa:  The United States and Brazil have jointly provided select developing countries with technical assistance to enhance food security and nutrition, while strengthening local institutional capacity.  Building on existing bilateral and trilateral partnerships, the United States Agency of International Development, in close coordination with the Brazilian Cooperation Agency, has proposed an increased investment of $2 million to improve food security in Mozambique.  The investment will raise agricultural production through the Brazilian-led transfer of science and technology and targeted training for agricultural policy makers, technicians and farmers.

Partnering on the United Nations Post-2015 Development Agenda: In addition to the trilateral food security cooperation described above, the United States and Brazil will jointly promote the implementation of the Post-2015 Development Agenda Sustainable Development Goal on food security, nutrition, and sustainable agriculture by working bilaterally and through the United Nations.  To fulfill this pledge, the United States and Brazil agree to work together via the Food and Agriculture Organization-hosted Tropical Agricultural Platform on improving nutrition by promoting innovation in local agricultural production.  Furthermore, the United States and Brazil agree to strengthen their commitment to sustainable agriculture, including by enhancing their cooperation in the Global Research Alliance (GRA) for Agricultural Greenhouse Gases.  As a symbol of our broader collaboration on food security and nutrition, the United States and Brazil will support the outcomes of the Second International Conference on Nutrition.  The United States also commits to support Brazil in its leadership of the 2016 Nutrition for Growth initiative, which Brazil will host during the 2016 Olympic Games.  

Supporting the Brazilian National Truth Commission:  At the request of the Brazilian National Truth Commission, the United States surveyed its departmental and archival holdings for relevant records on human rights abuses and political violence in Brazil between 1964 and 1985.  The National Declassification Center (NDC) led an initial search of 2.5 million pages, reviewed 400,000 potentially responsive pages, and identified over 4,500 relevant pages that were declassified in full or in part.  The NDC will digitize these pages, which will be available at the United States National Archives, and has provided them to the Government of Brazil.

Cyber and Internet Policy:  The United States and Brazil are partners in strengthening the “multistakeholder” approach to Internet governance to preserve the benefits of a single, reliable, open, interoperable, and secure Internet.  Toward that end, both countries are committed to holding the next iteration of the United States-Brazil Internet and Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) Working Group this fall in Brasilia.  Through discussion between our governments and with key stakeholders in the Internet Community, we will promote a vibrant digital economy, improve our collaboration on cybersecurity, discuss cybercrime prevention, strengthen capacity building activities, reaffirm our commitments to international security in cyberspace, and encourage the acceptance of norms of responsible state behavior in peacetime.   The United States looks forward to Brazil hosting the Internet Governance Forum in November 2015. 


Strengthening Defense and Security Cooperation


Defense Cooperation Agreement:  The United States notes with satisfaction the entry into force of the United States-Brazil Defense Cooperation Agreement (DCA).  The DCA will strengthen bilateral defense relations and enable greater cooperation between the United States and Brazil in defense-related matters, especially research and development, commercial initiatives, logistics support, technology security, and the acquisition and development of defense products and services.  The agreement promotes joint exercises and the exchange of information and equipment, especially to improve the conduct of international peacekeeping operations.

The General Security of Military Information Agreement:  The United States notes with satisfaction the entry into force of the United States-Brazil General Security of Military Information Agreement (GSOMIA).  The GSOMIA will allow the United States and Brazil to share certain types of information, technology, and hardware.  The GSOMIA will allow for more military exchanges, more sophisticated joint exercises and training, and improved interoperability.  It will also further facilitate the sharing of sophisticated capabilities and technologies and pave the way for space and other advanced technology demonstrations, scientific exchanges, and potentially joint technology development initiatives.

Defense Industry Dialogue:  The United States Departments of Defense and Commerce together with the Brazilian Ministry of Defense announced their endorsement of industry efforts to launch a bilateral Defense Industry Dialogue later this year.  This dialogue will institutionalize engagement between the U.S. and Brazilian private sectors to enable governments and industry to exchange information and ideas; increase technology cooperation and collaboration in the defense sector; deepen mutual understanding of our defense industries; and discuss long-term defense priorities.

Collaboration on Law Enforcement:  The United States Department of Homeland Security and Brazil Federal Highway Police agreed to formalize their already robust collaboration to counter international criminal organizations by signing a Joint Statement on Law Enforcement Collaboration.  The Joint Statement supports the continued collaboration of both governments to combat intellectual property rights violations, transnational criminal organizations, money laundering, and human trafficking.


Deepening People-to-People Ties through Education, Energy, Science and Technology, Health, and Innovation 


Career and Technical Education:  The United States and Brazil have established a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to promote the exchange of knowledge and experience between our two countries in the field of career and technical education. This MOU will encourage future arrangements among government, independent agencies, and institutions involved in career and technical education on internships, connecting industry to academia, the development of instructional programs, and faculty, staff, and student exchanges.

Funding Entrepreneurs:  Leveraging a grant from the United States Department of State and matching funds from Brazilian federal universities, the University of California Berkeley Haas School of Business will establish a pilot entrepreneurship training program in Brazil with federal universities to teach scientists and other entrepreneurs how to take ideas to market. 

Scholarly Collaboration on Climate Change:  The United States Department of State and Brazilian Ministry of Education have agreed to renew their joint commitments to support the Fulbright Regional Network for Applied Research (NEXUS) Program.  This iteration of the NEXUS program will bring together scholars from the United States, Brazil, and other countries in the Americas to confront the challenge of climate change through collaborative research. 

Cooperation on Energy and Related Science Research and Development: As an outcome of the May 2015 United States-Brazil Joint Commission Meeting (JCM) on Science and Technology, the United States Department of Energy and the Brazilian Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation agreed to identify areas for expanded clean energy research and development cooperation.  This expands the network of American and Brazilian researchers focused on clean energy-related research through student and scientist exchanges between the United States Energy Frontier Research Centers and Brazilian universities and research organizations supported by Brazil’s Scientific Mobility Program.

Environmental Cooperation:  The United States Environmental Protection Agency and the Brazilian Ministry of Environment have launched a new work plan under their Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to protect the environment while promoting economic growth and social development.  Under the MOU, the United States and Brazil will address water management and urban sustainability.  Additional areas for collaboration will include environmentally sensitive development of unconventional oil and gas sources, environmental impact assessments, and sustainable materials management. 

Health Cooperation:  Recognizing the importance of research and collaboration to improve health, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services completed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Ministry of Health of Brazil to foster further cooperation in health and biomedical research.  The MOU promotes research innovation, training, and collaborative activities in a wide range of shared priority areas, including, but not limited to, antimicrobial resistance, non-communicable diseases, neglected tropical diseases, regulatory practice and health data.

Labor Cooperation:  Under a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Labor Cooperation signed in June 2015, the United States and Brazil intend to continue to strengthen cooperation on employment and social protection; youth employment; equal opportunities and treatment at work; occupational safety and health; social dialogue and collective bargaining; child labor and forced labor; and other topics of mutual interest.  For over a decade, our countries have partnered to combat forced labor and child labor, both in Brazil and, increasingly, in other countries as well.  Both countries are supporting a trilateral partnership with Peru to replicate some components of Brazil’s own comprehensive approach to combat forced labor. 

Fitness, Physical Activity, and Sports Participation:  Recognizing the importance of physical activity for health, the United States Department of Health and Human Services and the Brazilian Ministry of Sports signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to improve public health through fitness, nutrition, and sports participation.  The MOU will allow for sharing ideas on national guidelines on physical activities and nutrition and expanding youth sports participation, with an emphasis on female youth and youth with disabilities. 

Collaboration on Science and Technology:  Following the May 28-29 Joint Commission Meeting on Science and Technology Cooperation, the United States and Brazil committed to collaborating in biodiversity and monitoring; continuing close cooperation in GEONETCast Americas and exploring expansion of the system; clean energy cooperation; collaborating on disaster recovery activities; creating a steering committee for the Public Health working group; and sharing best practices on evaluation of the impact of science, technology, education, and mathematics (STEM) education programs.

Information and Communications Technology Partnership:  The United States Trade and Development Agency signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Brazilian State Information and Communications Technology Association (ABEP) to support t information technology modernization in Brazil.  The partnership will facilitate the use of early project planning tools and technical exchanges between U.S. industry and ABEP’s member companies. 

Civil Space Cooperation:  The United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the Brazilian Space Agency signed three new arrangements that extend their civil space cooperation in new areas, including in heliophysics, adding Brazil as a partner to the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) Program, and enabling qualified Brazilian undergraduate and graduate level students to participate in an internship at a NASA Center. 

Research on Water Resources:  A critical element to preparing for natural hazards such as droughts and floods is a state-of-the-art hydrologic monitoring network of stream gages along with the technical expertise to analyze and publish scientific data in usable products.  A Memorandum of Understanding among the United States Geological Survey, National Water Agency of Brazil and Geologic Survey of Brazil will further the advancement of the collection, analysis, and research of the water resources of Brazil by establishing a uniform national benchmark network of stream gages that will provide timely hydrologic information so water resources and emergency managers can make informed decisions on the protection of life, property, and the economy.


	Presidents Barack Obama and Dilma Rousseff commit to intensify collaboration between the United States and Brazil, both bilaterally and under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), as our countries work to address the challenges posed by climate change.  The global scientific community has made clear that human activity is already changing the world’s climate system, causing serious impacts, putting ever larger numbers of people at risk, posing challenges to sustainable development, affecting particularly the poor and most vulnerable, and harming economies and societies around the world, including in the United States and Brazil.

Leading Together Towards Paris:

	The two Presidents reiterated their call for a successful outcome later this year at the Paris Climate Change Conference.  The Paris outcome should send a strong signal to the international community that governments, businesses and civil society are decisively taking on the climate challenge. 

	The Presidents expressed their commitment to work with each other and with other partners to resolve potential obstacles towards an ambitious and balanced Paris Agreement. Mindful of the long-term goal of limiting global temperature increase to a maximum of 2°C above preindustrial levels, they agreed that there should be strong nationally determined contributions, regular updating by Parties in order to promote greater ambition over time, and encouragement of longer-term strategies for transitioning to low-carbon economies.  There should also be strong and credible transparency, including reporting and review, as well as periodic stocktaking of its overall effectiveness.  The Presidents are committed to reaching an ambitious agreement that reflects the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, in light of different national circumstances.

	The Presidents recognize the social and economic value of mitigation actions and their co-benefits to adaptation, health and sustainable development. The Presidents pledged to work together toward mobilizing public funding and developing financial instruments to catalyze large-scale private investments to support low carbon development projects and countries’ transitions to low-carbon economies. Further, the Presidents affirmed the need for continued, robust financial support to help realize developing countries’ mitigation potential and to enhance their adaptation actions.

Taking Ambitious Climate Action:

	The Presidents underscored the benefits of early mitigation actions for limiting global temperature increase. They noted that both countries have been actively and productively engaged in recent years in a range of activities that have reduced greenhouse gas emissions. President Rousseff welcomed the ambitious national mitigation policies and measures of the United States and its constructive engagement in multilateral climate change negotiations. President Obama commended Brazil for its very strong mitigation results, principally through a significant curbing of deforestation in the Amazon region.

	The Presidents highlighted the fact that, since 2005, Brazil and the United States have reduced greenhouse gas emissions in absolute terms more than any other countries in the world.  Brazil has reduced its emissions by around 41% as compared to 2005, while the United States has reduced its emissions by around 10% and is on track to meet its 2020 target.  In the run-up to the UN Climate Conference in Paris, both countries are respectively putting forward strong post-2020 contributions consistent with their determination to show global leadership.

	Per its submission to the UNFCCC, the United States intends to achieve an economy-wide target of reducing its emissions by 26%-28% below 2005 levels in 2025 and to make best efforts to reduce its emissions by 28%.  Brazil will present a fair and ambitious intended nationally determined contribution that represents its highest possible effort beyond its current actions. It will be based on the implementation of broad policies, including those in the forestry, land-use, industrial, and energy sectors.  Brazil will pursue policies aimed at eliminating illegal deforestation, coupled with ambitious enhancement of carbon stocks through reforestation and forest restoration. For that purpose, Brazil intends to restore and reforest 12 million hectares of forests by 2030. In line with its goal to expand the use of renewable energy sources, Brazil intends that its total energy matrix reach, by 2030, a share of 28% to 33% from renewable sources (electricity and biofuels) other than hydropower. Brazil also intends to improve low-carbon agricultural and grazing land practices through the promotion of sustainable agriculture and productivity enhancement; to promote new, clean technology standards for industry; to further promote energy efficiency measures and to expand the use of non-fossil fuel energy sources domestically.

	Recognizing the need to accelerate the deployment of renewable energy to help power our economies, the United States and Brazil each intend to increase the share of renewables – beyond hydropower – in their respective electricity generation mixes to the level of 20% by 2030.

	The Presidents, recognizing the importance of managing hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), agreed to work multilaterally in the Montreal Protocol to consider promptly amendment proposals to phase down HFCs.

Brazil-United States Joint Initiative on Climate Change

	The two Presidents decide to launch a Joint Initiative on Climate Change, which will be implemented through a new high-level United States-Brazil Climate Change Working Group (CCWG) aimed at enhancing bilateral cooperation on issues relating to land use, clean energy, and adaptation, as well as policy dialogues on domestic and international climate issues.

	The Working Group will begin its work by October 2015. During its first meeting, the CCWG will discuss a work program to address areas of action for cooperation. The Climate Change Working Group will be a platform to manage some or all of the following initiatives, as well as others that might be developed over time.

Cooperation on Sustainable Land Use

	As part of the new CCWG, the United States and Brazil will promote actions on forests, agriculture, and land use to contribute to climate change mitigation and resilience as well as enhance economic growth.  Both countries are leaders in forest conservation and agricultural innovation and have implemented land sector programs designed to enhance mitigation and increase adaptation capacity.  Brazil and the United States commit to new and improved management of their forests, croplands and grasslands to increase resilience in forests and agricultural systems, safeguard the multiple services they provide, and share this expertise with other countries.  Brazil and the United States will take the following actions, among others:

	Enhancing progress on reducing forest degradation and preventing deforestation, including improvements in the productivity of agricultural and grazing lands; 

	Launching a Binational Program on Forest and Land Sector Investment to improve the conditions for attracting investments in sustainable forest management and forest restoration, encouraging the provision of ecosystem services, building resilience, mitigating climate change, and contributing to improved income streams for farmers.  This would include convening a public-private Forum on Innovative Forest Investment and launching a Binational Expert Group of government agencies to improve the conditions for forest investment in both countries. These initiatives will identify and help design appropriate financial and risk-mitigation mechanisms that aim to spur private sector funding for forest restoration;


		Establishing technology partnerships for basic and applied research on native species to promote the acceleration of forest restoration projects;   

		Deeper cooperation on monitoring, reporting, and verification of forest emissions and forest carbon stocks;

		Continuing identification and establishment of low-carbon agricultural practices for promotion of sustainable agriculture and productivity enhancements for the sector;

		Reinvigorating the work of the Global Research Alliance (GRA) for Agricultural Greenhouse Gases; 

		Building on collaborative efforts to enhance scientific research to address areas that help farmers, in our countries and globally, adapt to and mitigate climate change impacts;

		Signing a Declaration of Intentions between the U.S. Forest Service and Brazilian Ministry of Environment on solutions to uncontrolled burning in tropical areas, information technology for tracking and managing fire, and training managers, scientists, and technologists; and

		Pursuing opportunities to coordinate technical assistance in priority countries and regions on reforestation, forest monitoring, bioenergy production and low-carbon agriculture.  Priority areas include the Congo basin, Amazon basin, and Caribbean island States, where applicable.


Cooperation on Clean Energy

	The United States and Brazil will strengthen bilateral cooperation mechanisms for energy, including the Strategic Energy Dialogue, which will hold a minister-level session promptly and another meeting on October 8-9 2015.


		Renewable Energy: Taking advantage of the abundant renewable resources in both countries, we will expand research on energy supply from renewable energy sources, such as wind, solar, biomass, and renewable transportation fuels.  

		Energy Efficiency and Storage: Deepening existing cooperation, we will support smart grid initiatives, the use of energy efficient building materials and improve industrial energy efficiency, including through increased adoption of energy management and efficient energy storage systems, including batteries.

		Basic Energy Research: Exchanging experiences related to research, development and innovation, and fostering cooperation among universities and research institutions in both countries through the U.S. Energy Frontier Research Centers and Brazil’s Scientific Mobility Program.

		Nuclear Power Generation: Benefiting from the shared successful experiences of both countries, Brazil and the United States will cooperate on safe and sustainable nuclear power generation and technologies.

		Catalyzing Finance: Aiming to spur investment, the United States and Brazil will seek to jointly pilot innovative finance instruments in Brazil designed to mobilize new investments in renewable energy, energy efficiency, and/or resiliency efforts.


Cooperation on Adaptation to Climate Change

	Acknowledging the need to manage and reduce risks associated with climate change impacts, such as drought and extreme weather events, as well as the emerging opportunities associated with managing and reducing these risks, the United States and Brazil will work together, including through sharing experiences related to national adaptation planning, to build resilience to climate change impacts in areas such as biodiversity and ecosystems; infrastructure, including energy; agricultural production and food security; and water resources.

	The United States and Brazil will continue collaboration on atmospheric and ecosystem science research, building on the Green Ocean Amazon 2014/2015 experiment through postdoctoral educational exchanges between Brazilian and U.S. universities and laboratories. 

	The United States and Brazil will cooperate on managing issues at the nexus of water and energy, in the context of climate change.  As our countries face prolonged and increasingly intense droughts, we need to appropriately integrate energy-water planning and decision-making; collaborate on sustainable hydropower; improve resilient thermoelectric generation resilience; and increase the efficiency of water and wastewater treatment infrastructure systems.

	###
