
This year’s holiday theme, A Timeless Tradition, reflects long-held traditions cherished across America, and commemorates extraordinary moments that shaped the country during the past two centuries.

Below are highlights from the full holiday décor at the White House. 

Highlights:


		Over 68,000 guests from across the country and around the world are expected to visit the White House during the 2015 holiday season.

		Throughout the White House there are 62 trees and over 70,000 ornaments. 

		Each year, as part of the First Lady and Dr. Biden’s Joining Forces initiative, guests have been invited to share a note with our service members.  This year, rather than sending handwritten notes, as has been done in the past, visitors will have the opportunity to share digital messages using iPads set up on the East Landing.

		The White House Gingerbread House in the State Dining Room is an annual tradition.  This year’s gingerbread house is close to 500 pounds – with more than 250 pounds of gingerbread dough, 150 pounds of dark chocolate, 25 pounds of gum paste, 25 pounds of pulled and sculpted sugar work, and 25 pounds of icing.

		This year’s White House Christmas Tree, on display in the Blue Room, is an over 18 foot Fraser fir grown by Jay and Glenn Bustard in Lansdale, Pennsylvania.

		The majority of the holiday décor was designed by Rafanelli Events and executed by 89 volunteers from across the country.  Three of the rooms were designed by fashion designers, including Carolina Herrera, Duro Olowu, and Carol Lim and Humberto Leon of Opening Ceremony and KENZO.  More information about this collaboration is on page 3.

		Only 10% of the design used new products and materials.  The remaining 90% uses repurposed ornaments and embellishments that were already a part of the White House holiday inventory.

		The First Lady will be introduced by Cilicia Wong-Lopez, a holiday decorator and military spouse from Alexandria, Virginia.


East Visitor Entrance and East Wing Hallway


		Holiday Volunteer: Mary Mazzeffi (West Chicago, IL)

		As guests enter the White House, they are greeted by a family of penguins.  A glitter-clad sleigh is filled with ornaments and has two baby penguins at the reigns.

		Boxwood arches twinkle with light, creating a new twist on traditional garlands, surrounding the entrance doors and windows.

		Through the doors, bulbs of every color ornament the chandeliers and railings, and bright ball garlands reflect the soft glow of white lights in the windows.

		Holiday ornaments dangle from the chandeliers.


East Visitor Entrance and Landing


		Holiday Volunteer: Elizabeth Schmidt (Delray Beach, FL)

		The very first thing visitors will see on the East Landing is a tree that pays tribute to our Armed Forces.  The tree is adorned with gold star ornaments that will be added by families of fallen heroes to pay tribute to those who made the ultimate sacrifice for our country.   

		Additionally, an installation of mailboxes, care packages, and garland made with airmail envelopes decorate the East Landing.  These items symbolize the love we send to our troops over the holiday season.

		Each year, as part of the First Lady and Dr. Biden’s Joining Forces initiative, guests have been invited to share a note with our service members.  This year, rather than sending hand written notes, as we have done in the past, visitors will have the opportunity to share digital messages using iPads set up on the East Landing.  For more information on supporting our service members and their families, please visit www.JoiningForces.gov.


East Colonnade


		Holiday Volunteer: Trevor Smith (Arlington, MA)

		As part of the First Lady’s Reach Higher initiative, a collection of hand-cut paper snowflakes hang from the ceiling of the East Colonnade. 

		Some of these snowflakes were made by students from Amidon-Bowen Elementary School and Horton’s Kid in Washington, D.C. and share the hand-written aspirations of these students.

		Other snowflakes represent each of the 56 states and territories and feature iconic symbols from all across America such as the state flags and seals.

		Outside, 56 “snow people” represent the number of states and territories in the United States.


East Garden Room/Booksellers


		Holiday Volunteer: Tonya Love (Oakland, CA)

		Larger-than-life Bo and Sunny replicas are created out of nearly 55,000 feet of yarn knitted into 7,000 yarn pom-poms. 

		Topiaries, wreaths, and ropes, comprised of tennis balls create a dog’s holiday dream.

		A holiday poem to all of America from Bo and Sunny is featured on the wall.


Lower Cross Hall/Ground Floor Corridor  


		Holiday Volunteer: Ron Kline (Los Angeles, CA)

		The silver wonderland of the Lower Cross Hall features arch installations of garland accented by silver balls and nearly 4,000 bells.


Library


		Holiday Volunteer: Nancy Barsotti (Carnegie, PA)

		Carol Lim and Humberto Leon of Opening Ceremony and KENZO designed and decorated the Library. 

		The room pays homage to the more than 2,700 books housed in the Library.

		The room is themed as a holiday forest of novels and manuscripts.  The text of books decorates the room and celebrates our American story, drawing the focus towards the library as a source of knowledge and inspiration.

		Design details include handcrafted, custom-made book ornaments, hand-painted marbleized globes, original quill arrangements, handmade snowmen with quote scarves, and origami trees. Threaded throughout the library are quotes from great writers and scholars, to honor our nation’s prolific thinkers and rich history.


Vermeil Room


		Holiday Volunteer: Patricia Yaddow (Jacksonville, NC)

		Duro Olowu designed and decorated the Vermeil Room.

		The room includes two eight-foot Christmas trees draped with vintage fabrics, ornate appliqué and toys, vintage ribbons, and encrusted hanging balls. 

		The room features a centerpiece diorama consisting of miniature faux shell Christmas trees with a gilded white-gold base to reflect the room’s silver collection.  The tree is set on a base draped in printed antique African fabric, and has a collection of 1920s French bisque porcelain dolls surrounded by original miniatures of Italian Florentine furniture.

		Miniature trees decorate the fireplace mantel and other surfaces alongside beaded and upholstered ornaments, toys and animals, fabric pompoms, bows and ribbons - all swathed in green foliage.


China Room


		Holiday Volunteer: Ellen Carley (Grand Rapids, MI)

		Carolina Herrera designed and decorated the China Room.

		Fresh pine and greenery obelisks flank the doorways of the China Room and evergreen and eucalyptus garland adorns the fireplace, giving off a fragrant scent embodying the holiday spirit. 

		Alongside an 8-foot-tree, the central table is wrapped in classic navy plaid and topped with a pine tree and vibrant red gift boxes.

		Throughout the room, Kailua Blue ribbons represent the Obama China Service.  Chosen by First Lady Michelle Obama and debuted earlier this year, this china pattern features a bright Kailua Blue, evoking the waters off the coast of the President’s home-state of Hawaii. 


Grand Foyer and Cross Hall


		Holiday Volunteer: Candace Barrett Birk (St. Paul, MN)

		The Grand Foyer and Cross Hall are filled with crimson holly and glittering gold vases. 

		Oversized, multi-colored ornaments are strung between the columns, wreaths of Ilex berry are displayed in the windows, and ball garlands adorn the railings and doorways.

		Two holiday trees are dressed with jewel-toned balls.


State Dining Room 


		Holiday Volunteer: Glenda Alexander (Douglasville, GA)

		In the State Dining Room, there is a giant gumball machine with snow-white gumballs.

		The Gumball Tree was created with nearly 4,000 gumballs.

		The room features a 6-foot-tall teddy bear and hundreds of vintage nutcrackers.  

		Toys, gifts, and presents garnish two Christmas trees.

		The White House Gingerbread House in the State Dining Room is an annual tradition.  This year’s gingerbread house is close to 500 pounds – with more than 250 pounds of gingerbread dough, 150 pounds of dark chocolate, 25 pounds of gum paste, 25 pounds of pulled and sculpted sugar work, and 25 pounds of icing. This is the first year the East and West Wings have been added to the gingerbread house.


Red Room


		Holiday Volunteer: Andrea Marks (Spotsylvania, VA)

		In the Red Room, apple wreaths hang from the window.

		Bright red cardinals and crisp golden oak leaves embody the cheerful spirit of the season and accentuate the wintry garland made of magnolia drapes across the mantel. 


Blue Room


		Holiday Volunteer: Christina Donovan (Arlington, MA)

		Inside this oval room, is this year’s White House Christmas Tree.  It is an 18.5-foot Fraser fir grown by Jay and Glenn Bustard in Lansdale, Pennsylvania.  

		Messages to our troops from their families wind around the tree on a ribbon.  At the end of the holiday season, each military family will receive their portion of the ribbon as a symbol of the gratitude the nation feels for their service.

		The inspiration for this tree are the stars and stripes of the American Flag which honor the service members who protect our great nation.

		The tree is wrapped with a gold star garland, representing the stars of our flag, and the protection of our liberty by the military.


Green Room


		Holiday Volunteer: Cheryl Forbes (Bronx, NY)

		Wreathes throughout the room are festooned with gold leaves.

		The mantel and trees feature purple and teal ornaments with peacock feathers. The peacock is a symbol of integrity, and the beauty we can achieve when we show our true colors. 


East Room


		Holiday Volunteer: Collin Falvey (Brookfield, WI)

		Entering the historic East Room under a canopy of sparkling icicles and glimmering silver spheres, guests are greeted with a multitude of white, silver, and champagne tones.

		Four grand trees are covered in ornate decorations of iridescent pearls, frosty icicles, vintage jewels, and delicate buttons trim the edges of the largest room in the White House.

		A long-standing holiday tradition—the White House crèche—graces this room. The nativity scene made of terra cotta and intricately carved wood was fashioned in Naples, Italy in the eighteenth century.  Donated to the White House in the 1960s, this piece has sat in the East Room for the holidays for more than forty-five years, spanning nine administrations. 

		Twelve works of art are nestle in to the mantles.


	MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

	THE SECRETARY OF STATE

	SUBJECT:      Delegation of Reporting Functions Specified in Section 941 of the Fiscal Year 2014 National Defense Authorization Act

	By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, I delegate the reporting functions conferred upon the President by section 941 of the Fiscal Year 2014 National Defense Authorization Act (Public Law 113-66) to the Secretary of Defense.  In carrying out the functions under this delegation, the Secretary of Defense shall consult with the Secretary of State and, as appropriate, other departments and agencies.

	The Secretary of Defense is authorized and directed to publish this memorandum in the Federal Register.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE

	SUBJECT:      Suspension of Limitations under the Jerusalem Embassy Act

	Pursuant to the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, including section 7(a) of the Jerusalem Embassy Act of 1995 (Public Law 104-45) (the "Act"), I hereby determine that it is necessary, in order to protect the national security interests of the United States, to suspend for a period of 6 months the limitations set forth in sections 3(b) and 7(b) of the Act.

	You are authorized and directed to transmit this determination to the Congress, accompanied by a report in accordance with section 7(a) of the Act, and to publish this determination in the Federal Register.

	This suspension shall take effect after the transmission of this determination and report to the Congress.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

“We are a place that believes every child, no matter where they come from, can grow up to be anything they want… And I’m confident that if we fix No Child Left Behind, if we continue to reform American education, continue to invest in our children’s future, that’s the America we will always be.”

	- Remarks by the President on the No Child Left Behind Act, March 14, 2011

	Kenmore Middle School, Arlington, Virginia

	Today, the Obama Administration is praising action by the House of Representatives to pass the Every Student Succeeds Act, a bipartisan bill to fix No Child Left Behind, and is calling on the Senate to take swift action on the legislation so that it can be signed into law before the end of the year. The bill rejects the overuse of standardized tests and one-size-fits-all mandates on our schools, ensures that our education system will prepare every child to graduate from high school ready for college and careers, and provides more children access to high-quality state preschool programs.

The bipartisan bill passed by the House includes many of the key reforms the Administration has called on Congress to enact and encouraged states and districts to adopt in exchange for waivers offering relief from the more onerous provisions of No Child Left Behind (NCLB). The bill helps ensure educational opportunity for all students by:


		Holding all students to high academic standards that prepare them for success in college and careers.

		Ensuring accountability by guaranteeing that when students fall behind, states redirect resources into what works to help them and their schools improve, with a particular focus on the very lowest-performing schools, high schools with high dropout rates, and schools with achievement gaps.

		Empowering state and local decision-makers to develop their own strong systems for school improvement based upon evidence, rather than imposing cookie-cutter federal solutions like the No Child Left Behind Act did.

		Reducing the often onerous burden of testing on students and teachers, making sure that tests don’t crowd out teaching and learning, without sacrificing clear, annual information parents and educators need to make sure our children are learning.

		Providing more children access to high-quality preschool.

		Establishing new resources for proven strategies that will spur reform and drive opportunity and better outcomes for America’s students.


	In recognition of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA)’s legacy as a civil rights law, the bipartisan bill upholds critical protections for America’s disadvantaged students. It ensures that states and school districts will hold schools to account for the progress of all students and prescribes meaningful reforms to remedy underperformance in those schools failing to serve all students. It excludes harmful “portability” provisions that would siphon funds away from the students and schools most in need, and maintains dedicated resources and supports for America’s vulnerable children – including students with disabilities, English Learners, Native American students, homeless children, neglected and delinquent children, and migrant and seasonal farmworker children. It also ensures that states and districts continue the work they’ve begun this year to ensure that all students – including students from low-income families and students of color – have equitable access to excellent educators.  

EMBRACING THE ADMINISTRATION’S PRINCIPLES FOR REFORM

College and Career-Ready Standards for America’s Learners: The bill affirms the path taken by 48 states and the District of Columbia to hold all students to challenging academic content standards that will prepare them to graduate from high school prepared for success in college and the workforce. In 2008, America’s governors and state education officials came together to develop a new set of college- and career-ready standards for their schools. The Obama Administration supported those efforts through its Race to the Top grant program and the federal-state partnership established in its ESEA flexibility agreements.

Rigorous Accountability for All Students: Consistent with the Administration’s legislative proposals and the policies in place under the Administration’s ESEA flexibility agreements, the bill builds on the federal-state partnerships in place in over 40 states to require meaningful goals for the progress of all students, and to ensure that every student subgroup makes gains toward college and career-readiness. States must set ambitious targets to close student achievement and graduation rate gaps among subgroups of students in order to meet their goals. In schools where too many students consistently fail to reach the goals and other indicators set by the state, school districts will ensure they receive tailored interventions and supports proportionate to the needs of those schools and the students they serve.

Reform and Resources for America’s Struggling Schools and Students: The bill will target resources, attention, and effort to make gains for our students attending schools most in need of help. Consistent with the policies in place under the Administration’s ESEA flexibility agreements, the bill moves away from NCLB’s one-size-fits-all accountability and ensures that states undertake reforms in their lowest performing schools, in high schools with high dropout rates, and in schools where subgroups are falling behind. It includes provisions that would require districts to use evidence-based models to support whole-school interventions in the lowest-performing 5 percent of schools and schools where more than a third of high school students do not graduate on time, and includes dedicated funding to support interventions in these schools. In schools where subgroups of students persistently underperform, school districts must mount targeted interventions and supports to narrow gaps and improve student achievement. If such schools are not showing improvement, the state will ensure more rigorous strategies are put in place. Moreover, the Department of Education has the authority it needs to ensure that states carry out their responsibilities. 

New Incentives to Improve Opportunities and Outcomes for Students: The bill includes initiatives modeled after the Administration’s programs to:


		Establish or expand access to high-quality, state-funded preschool for children from low- and moderate-income families, building from the Administration’s Preschool Development Grants program.

		Develop, refine, and replicate innovative and ambitious reforms to close the achievement gap in America’s schools, similar to the Administration’s existing Investing in Innovation (i3) program.

		Expand incentives to prepare, develop, and advance effective teachers and principals in America’s schools.

		Leverage resources to address the significant challenges faced by students and families living in high-poverty communities through the Promise Neighborhoods effort, supporting a full continuum of services from early learning through college.

		Expand support for high-performing public charter schools for high-need students.


A Smart and Balanced Approach to Testing: The bill maintains important statewide assessments to ensure that teachers and parents can mark the progress and performance of their children every year, from third to eighth grade and once in high school. The bill encourages a smarter approach to testing by moving away from a sole focus on standardized tests to drive decisions around the quality of schools, and by allowing for the use of multiple measures of student learning and progress, along with other indicators of student success to make school accountability decisions. It also includes provisions consistent with the Administration’s principles around reducing the amount of classroom time spent on standardized testing, including support for state efforts to audit and streamline their current assessment systems.

Promoting Equity in State and Local Funding: The Administration has called repeatedly for states and school districts to more equitably distribute state and local dollars to schools with the greatest need. The bill includes a pilot program – similar to a proposal put forward by the Administration this year in the FY16 budget – that provides for weighted student funding. Under the pilot, districts must demonstrate a commitment to equitable distribution of state and local dollars—based on actual per-pupil expenditures—to their highest poverty schools. In exchange, districts would be allowed to allocate and use Title I and other federal formula funds in a more flexible manner to support comprehensive plans that improve achievement and outcomes for their neediest students. The bill also includes provisions that require reporting on actual school-level expenditures, allowing the public for the first time to see the amount of federal, state, and local funding distributed to each and every school.  The bill rejects so-called “portability” provisions in the House-passed bill that would have allowed states to shift federal funds away from the schools that need them most.

	HELSINKI HUMAN RIGHTS DAY, 2015

	- - - - - - -

	BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

	A PROCLAMATION

	Four decades ago, the leaders of the United States, Canada, the Soviet Union, and countries from across a divided Europe came together to sign the Helsinki Final Act -- a document reflecting the conviction that the security of states is inextricably linked to the security of their citizens' rights.  This comprehensive security concept is forever enshrined in the Act and is mirrored in the subsequent statements and commitments made by the members of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).  Today, the Act continues to shine as a beacon for all who reach, often at great risk to themselves, for human dignity, for justice and tolerance, and for democratic ideals -- including the notions that power is derived from the consent of the governed and that human rights and fundamental freedoms belong to all of us -- no matter where we live or where we come from.  On Helsinki Human Rights Day, we pledge our cooperation and mutual respect as we work to fulfill the commitments made in the Helsinki Final Act.

	The 57 OSCE states that stretch across North America, Europe, and Eurasia stand stronger when we stand together, and we must defend and uphold the commitments made in Helsinki 40 years ago.  Recognition of the inherent dignity and human rights of every person, respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states, and restraint from the threat or use of force are essential to safeguarding a Europe and a Eurasia that are whole, free, and at peace.  As the OSCE Ministerial Council convenes in Belgrade, Serbia, the United States renews its commitment to these principles and urges other member states to do the same.

	Thanks to the work of governments and the contributions of civil society, we have made historic progress to advance security, democracy, and human rights across the OSCE region in the last four decades.  Still, we face significant challenges.  Russian aggression against its neighbors, most recently Ukraine, is contrary to the principles of respect for each nation's sovereignty and territorial integrity laid out in the Helsinki Final Act.  The ability of citizens to exercise their fundamental freedoms of association, expression, and peaceful assembly is increasingly constricted in a number of participating states.  Actions based on hate and prejudice remain prevalent in too many states and are too often still reflected in national policy.  These attitudes will continue to obstruct democracy's success until we root them out from both our institutions and our hearts.  The United States strongly condemns the heinous terrorist attacks in Ankara, as well as the bombing of the Russian plane in Egypt.  And in the wake of the tragic terrorist attacks in Paris, we recommit to our fight against terrorism and violent extremism while reaffirming our adherence to our common ideals with the French people and with any free society, similar to those delineated in the Helsinki Final Act:  liberté, égalité, and fraternité.

	The Helsinki Final Act inspires our vision for democracy, human rights, and human dignity.  It inspires a vision for open economies and shared prosperity, and a world in which states resolve disputes peacefully and work together to build and maintain trust.  It is a framework that, if its commitments are upheld, can enable us to move beyond division and prejudice and toward a more democratic, prosperous, and peaceful OSCE region.  Let us resolve to stand with victims of oppression and with all who yearn to exercise their human rights.  Together, we can faithfully implement our shared Helsinki commitments and help forge an ever better future for all.

	NOW, THEREFORE, I, BARACK OBAMA, President of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, do hereby proclaim December 3, 2015, as Helsinki Human Rights Day.  I call upon all the people of the United States to observe this day with appropriate ceremonies and activities reflecting our steadfast dedication to human rights and democratic values.  I also call upon the governments and peoples of all other signatory states to renew their commitment to comply with the principles established and consecrated in the Helsinki Final Act.

	IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this second day of December, in the year of our Lord two thousand fifteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the two hundred and fortieth.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	INTERNATIONAL DAY OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES, 2015

	- - - - - - -

	BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

	A PROCLAMATION

	The United States has long been a leading voice for the rights of persons with disabilities, and we join the international community in expressing our support for them in all they do and in recognizing them as the valuable members of society that they are.  This year, as we celebrate the 25th anniversary of the passing of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) -- landmark legislation that helps ensure the places that make up our shared national life truly belong to everyone -- we also recognize that protecting the rights of those with disabilities is not just an American ideal, but a cornerstone of our work to ensure human rights around the globe.  On International Day of Persons with Disabilities, we rededicate ourselves to building a fairer and more accessible world and to upholding the fundamental dignity and respect of all people. 

	A quarter-century ago, our Nation marked a milestone in the long march toward achieving equal opportunity for all with the passage of the ADA.  A result of quiet persistence and perseverance coupled with passionate and vocal advocacy, this Act showed the world our full commitment to the rights of people with disabilities, and in these past 25 years, we have built on the foundation of equality laid by this law.  The Affordable Care Act also guarantees people with disabilities a basic but fundamental protection -- that they can no longer be denied access to health insurance due to a pre-existing condition.  Additionally, my Administration has supported increasing funding for the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) grants, which would boost our efforts to provide every child living with a disability with a quality public education.  And this year, the White House hosted a series of events commemorating IDEA's 40th anniversary to highlight the importance of inclusion and of recognizing the talents of all Americans in every aspect of society.

	Each day, our founding values of equality and opportunity guide our work to forge a bright future for people with disabilities.  Serving to protect these ideals are our brave men and women in uniform who give of themselves for us all, and when they return home with wounds of war, seen or unseen, it is our sacred obligation to ensure they can take full advantage of the freedoms they fought so hard to defend.  That is why my Administration has worked to provide our country's veterans who have disabilities with access to timely, quality health care and the tools needed to convert their military skills into careers in civilian life.

	As we continue working to expand the promise of America to all our people, we must remember that the fight for disability rights should not stop at our Nation's shores.  The United States continues to uphold our global commitment to the international disability community.  During my first year in office, the United States signed the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, an international declaration, now signed by 160 countries, that recognizes the inherent worth of people with disabilities and urges equal protection and benefits before the law.  I am disappointed that the Senate blocked ratification of the Convention, and I continue to call on these elected leaders, all of whom represent Americans with disabilities, to provide their advice and consent to ratification.  A pillar of American leadership is our profound respect for the human dignity of all people, and it is imperative that we reach for a day when all of the more than 1 billion people of the world who live with a disability can enjoy the same rights afforded to those living here at home.

	Our pursuit of equal rights for those with disabilities is not over.  Today, we stand on the shoulders of generations who fought for better laws, demanded better treatment, and who, by being good, decent people and hard workers, proved to the world that having a disability should not force individuals into the margins of society.  On this day, let us honor the efforts of those who agitated for the respect and dignity of all by picking up the inextinguishable torch of equality and carrying it forward into a future that recognizes the incredible talents and skills of people with disabilities.  Together, we can secure a tomorrow in which all people know no limits but the scope of their dreams.

	NOW, THEREFORE, I, BARACK OBAMA, President of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, do hereby proclaim December 3, 2015, as International Day of Persons with Disabilities.  I call on all Americans to observe this day with appropriate ceremonies, activities, and programs.

	IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand this second day of December, in the year of our Lord two thousand fifteen, and of the Independence of the United States of America the two hundred and fortieth.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA
