
	EXECUTIVE ORDER

	- - - - - - -

	IMPLEMENTING THE NATIONAL HIV/AIDS STRATEGY

	FOR THE UNITED STATES FOR 2015-2020

	 

	By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, and in order to ensure improved health outcomes for Americans at risk for or living with HIV/AIDS and achieve greater coordination across the Federal Government, I hereby order as follows: 

	Section 1.  Policy.  My Administration has made substantial progress in addressing the domestic HIV epidemic since the National HIV/AIDS Strategy for the United States (Strategy), the first of its kind, was released in July 2010.  The Strategy has served as a blueprint for executive departments and agencies (agencies) as well as for community partners in the private and nonprofit sectors.  This effort has led to increased coordination and collaboration among agencies and fostered the use of evidence-based policy approaches for improving HIV prevention and care.

	Federal, State, and local agencies have contributed to significant improvements in health outcomes through their enhanced focus on the HIV care continuum -- the sequential stages of care from being diagnosed to achieving viral suppression.  Our partners across all levels of government and all sectors of society have also worked to ensure that all Americans living with HIV/AIDS receive our full support at every stage of their illness.

	Further, my Administration has been committed to reducing the HIV-related disparities experienced by certain populations, including gay and bisexual men of all races and ethnicities, Black women and men, Latino women and men, people who inject drugs, youth aged 13-24, people in the Southern United States, and transgender women.  Addressing the intersection between HIV/AIDS, violence against women and girls, and gender-related health disparities has also been a priority.  The Working Group on the Intersection of HIV/AIDS, Violence Against Women and Girls, and Gender-related Health Disparities established in my memorandum of March 30, 2012, has focused its efforts on increasing screenings for HIV and intimate partner violence, addressing violence and trauma when supporting women in HIV care, and expanding public education efforts across all levels of government regarding HIV and violence against women and girls.

	Today, I am releasing the National HIV/AIDS Strategy for the United States:  Updated to 2020 (Updated Strategy) to build on this progress.  The Updated Strategy integrates the recommendations of the HIV Care Continuum Working Group, established in Executive Order 13649 of July 15, 2013 (HIV Care Continuum Initiative), and the recommendations of the Working Group on the Intersection of HIV/AIDS, Violence Against Women and Girls, and Gender-related Health Disparities, so that their work can inform the Nation's response to the domestic HIV/AIDS epidemic.  The Updated Strategy also takes into account recent research advancements in our understanding of HIV/AIDS, and builds on the historic successes of the Affordable Care Act, which is helping millions of Americans, including those who are living with HIV, access affordable, quality health care.

	This order is designed to ensure successful implementation of the Updated Strategy by requiring coordination and collaboration by, and accountability of, the Federal Government; fostering enhanced and innovative partnerships with State, tribal, and local governments; and encouraging the commitment of all parts of society.  The duties and authorities this order assigns are in addition to those assigned by my memorandum of July 13, 2010 (Implementation of the National HIV/AIDS Strategy).  In light of recent progress and continuing challenges, we must continue to improve our national effort to reduce new HIV infections, increase access to care for people living with HIV, reduce HIV-related disparities and health inequities, and achieve greater coordination across all levels of government.

	Sec. 2.  Role of the White House Office of National AIDS Policy (ONAP).  (a)  The Director of ONAP, in consultation with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), shall be responsible for monitoring the implementation of the Updated Strategy.

	(b)  The Director of ONAP shall annually report to the President on the implementation of the Updated Strategy, including progress in meeting key targets and taking key actions identified in the Updated Strategy and the Federal Action Plan, an annual guidepost developed by ONAP in conjunction with agencies, designed to implement new efforts to address the domestic HIV/AIDS epidemic.

	Sec. 3.  Lead Agency Responsibilities.  While the Updated Strategy will require a Government-wide effort in order to succeed fully, certain agencies have primary responsibilities and competencies in implementing the Updated Strategy.

	(a) Designation of Lead Agencies.  Lead agencies for implementing the Updated Strategy shall be:


		the Department of Defense;

		the Department of Justice;

		the Department of the Interior;

		the Department of Labor;

		the Department of Health and Human Services; 

		the Department of Housing and Urban Development;

		the Department of Education;

		the Department of Veterans Affairs;

		the Department of Homeland Security; and

		the Social Security Administration.


	​(b)  Lead Agency Action Plans.  Within 100 days of the date of this order, the head of each lead agency shall submit a report to ONAP and OMB on the agency's action plan for implementing the Updated Strategy.  The plans shall assign responsibilities to agency officials, designate reporting structures for actions identified in the Federal Action Plan, and identify other appropriate actions to advance the Updated Strategy.  The plans shall also include steps to strengthen coordination in planning, budgeting for, and evaluating domestic HIV/AIDS programs within and across agencies.  Lead agencies are encouraged to consider, and reflect in their plans, steps to streamline grantee reporting requirements and funding announcements related to HIV/AIDS programs and activities.

	​(c)  Ongoing Responsibilities of Lead Agencies.  The head of each lead agency shall:


		designate an official responsible for coordinating the agency's ongoing efforts to implement the Updated Strategy;

		develop and support a process for sharing progress reports, including status updates on achieving specific quantitative targets established by the Updated Strategy, with relevant agencies and ONAP on an annual basis, or at such other times as ONAP requests; and

		in consultation with OMB, use the budget development process to prioritize programs and activities most critical to meeting the goals of the Updated Strategy.


	Sec. 4.  Other Agency Responsibilities.  All agencies that support HIV/AIDS programs and activities shall ensure that, to the extent permitted by law, they are meeting the goals of the Updated Strategy.

	​(a)   Department of State.  Within 100 days of the date of this order, the Secretary of State shall submit to ONAP and OMB recommendations for improving the Government-wide response to the domestic HIV/AIDS epidemic, based on lessons learned in implementing the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief program.

	​(b)   Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (Commission). 

	Within 100 days of the date of this order, the Chair of the Commission shall submit to ONAP and OMB recommendations for increasing employment opportunities for people living with HIV and a plan for addressing employment-related discrimination against people living with HIV, consistent with the Commission's authorities and other applicable law.

	Sec. 5.  Role of the Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS (PACHA).  The PACHA, which was established by Executive Order 12963 of June 14, 1995 (Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS), as amended, shall monitor the implementation of the Updated Strategy and make recommendations to the Secretary of Health and Human Services (Secretary) and to the Director of ONAP, as appropriate, concerning implementation and progress in achieving the Updated Strategy's goals.

	Sec. 6.  National HIV/AIDS Strategy Federal Interagency Working Group.  There is established the National HIV/AIDS Strategy Federal Interagency Working Group (Federal Interagency Working Group) to support the implementation of the Updated Strategy.

	​(a)   Membership.  The Federal Interagency Working Group shall be co-chaired by the Director of ONAP and the Secretary or their designees.  In addition to the Co-Chairs, the Federal Interagency Working Group shall consist of representatives from each lead agency, OMB, and any other agency or office designated by the Co-Chairs.

	​(b)   Consultation.  The Federal Interagency Working Group shall consult with the PACHA, as appropriate.

	​(c)   Outreach.  The Federal Interagency Working Group shall hold regular meetings and conduct outreach with representatives of private and nonprofit organizations, State, tribal, and local governments and agencies, elected officials, and other interested persons to assist the Federal Interagency Working Group in its efforts.

	​(d)   Functions.  As part of its efforts, the Federal Interagency Working Group shall:


		request and review information from agencies describing their efforts to implement the Updated Strategy;

		share and disseminate best practices to combat the HIV epidemic among agencies and other stakeholders;

		integrate new HIV-related research results into the overall implementation of the Updated Strategy;

		obtain input from community partners, scientific and technical experts, and stakeholders in State, tribal, and local governments to inform implementation of the Updated Strategy;

		increase government and public awareness of HIV-related issues;

		specify how to better align and coordinate Federal efforts, both within and across agencies, to improve health outcomes for Americans at risk for or living with HIV; and

		integrate the Working Group on the Intersection of HIV/AIDS, Violence Against Women and Girls, and Gender-related Health Disparities into the implementation of the Updated Strategy.


	​(e)   Reporting.


		Within 100 days of the date of this order, the Federal Interagency Working Group shall provide recommendations to the President on actions that agencies should take to implement the Updated Strategy through 2020.

		The Director of ONAP shall include, as part of the Director's annual report to the President, a report prepared by the Federal Interagency Working Group concerning Government-wide progress in implementing the Updated Strategy.


	Sec. 7.  General Provisions.  (a)  Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:


		the authority granted by law to an executive department, agency, or the head thereof; or

		the functions of the Director of OMB relating to budgetary, administrative, or legislative proposals.


	(a)   This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.

	(b)   This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	Today, President Obama signed an Executive Order releasing the National HIV/AIDS Strategy: Updated to 2020, detailing principles and priorities to guide our collective national work to address HIV in the United States over the next five years.

	In 2010, the President launched the nation’s first comprehensive National HIV/AIDS Strategy. The Strategy has changed the way the American people talk about HIV, prioritize and organize HIV prevention and care services locally, and deliver clinical and other related services that support people living with HIV and encourage their engagement in treatment and care.

	This updated Strategy reflects the accomplishments and the lessons learned since the original Strategy was released in 2010. Looking ahead to 2020, this Update retains the Strategy’s original vision and four main goals:


Goal 1: Reducing New HIV Infections

Goal 2: Increasing Access to Care and Improving Health Outcomes for People Living with HIV

Goal 3: Reducing HIV-related Disparities and Health Inequities

Goal 4: Achieving a More Coordinated National Response


The Update calls for particular focus on the following priority activities through 2020:


Widespread HIV testing and linkage to care, enabling people living with HIV to access treatment early.

Broad support for people living with HIV to remain engaged in comprehensive care, including support for treatment adherence.

Universal viral suppression among people living with HIV, since it benefits their health and reduces transmission of the virus to others.

Full access to comprehensive pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) services for those whom it is appropriate and desired, with support for medication adherence for those using PrEP.  As one of the tools in the HIV prevention toolkit, PrEP is a way for people who don’t have HIV to prevent HIV infection by taking a pill every day.


	Continuing on the path set by the 2010 Strategy, the Update also recognizes that—for a variety of reasons—HIV does not impact all Americans equally. The HIV epidemic in the United States is concentrated in key populations and geographic areas and the Update guides our response to prioritize the following groups:


		Gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men of all races and ethnicities, noting the particularly high burden of HIV among Black gay and bisexual men

		Black women and men

		Latinos and Latinas

		People who inject drugs

		Youth aged 13 to 24 years, noting the particularly high burden of HIV among young Black gay and bisexual men

		People in the Southern United States

		Transgender women, noting the particularly high burden of HIV among Black transgender women


Leveraging Major Scientific and Policy Advances:

	The 11 Steps and 37 Recommended Actions in the updated Strategy integrate and leverage the major scientific, policy, and other advances that have occurred since 2010. These include:


Implementation of the Affordable Care Act: The Affordable Care Act has increased the number of Americans—including persons living with and at risk for HIV—who have access to health care coverage including preventive services such as HIV testing that are covered without cost sharing.

High Impact Prevention: Since 2010, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has pursued an approach that concentrates limited HIV prevention resources on the most cost-effective and scalable interventions that are aligned geographically and demographically with the burden of HIV.

HIV Testing: The past five years have seen the development of new HIV diagnostic tests and expanded testing efforts. In addition, screening all persons aged 15 to 65 years for HIV is now a grade “A” recommendation of the independent U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. This means that, as of April 2014, new health plans under the Affordable Care Act must offer HIV screening without cost sharing.

Benefits of HIV Treatment: Results from the National Institutes of Health (NIH)-supported Strategic Timing of Antiretroviral Treatment (START) study recently provided clear evidence that early treatment promotes improved health outcomes for those with HIV. It also demonstrated that starting HIV therapy early not only protects individuals against opportunistic infections associated with AIDS, but also from AIDS-related cancers as well as other non-AIDS outcomes.

Treatment as Prevention: The NIH-funded HIV Prevention Trials Network 052 study showed that, in addition to benefiting their own health and longevity, people living with HIV who adhere to effective antiretroviral therapy and have a suppressed viral load can reduce the risk of sexual transmission of HIV by 96 percent. Antiretroviral therapy for pregnant women with HIV also dramatically reduces the risk of transmission during pregnancy and childbirth.

Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program (RWHAP): The RWHAP is the largest Federal program solely dedicated to providing a comprehensive system of care to people living with HIV who do not have sufficient health care coverage or financial resources to cope with HIV. It touches the lives of over half of all people living with HIV in the United States, by taking a public health approach to provide medical care and essential support services to people living with HIV who do not have sufficient health care coverage or financial resources to cope with HIV infection. Doing so not only improves the health outcomes for individuals with HIV, it serves the public health benefit of helping to prevent HIV transmission. Since 2010, critical funding increases for the AIDS Drug Assistance Program have been provided to ensure access to lifesaving treatment.

PrEP: In 2012, the FDA approved the use of Truvada for use as PrEP after several clinical trials demonstrated its efficacy. To make best use of this new HIV prevention tool, the U.S. Public Health Service released clinical practice guidelines in 2014 to assist clinicians in providing PrEP and associated services to their patients at substantial risk for HIV infection. When taken consistently, PrEP can reduce one’s risk for acquiring HIV by up to 92%.

Digital Tools and Technology: Digital technology and social media have changed how health-related information is delivered, opening new opportunities to use digital tools to extend the reach and deepen the impact of our efforts to provide information and promote HIV testing as well as to help link and retain individuals in care.

Integrating previous Executive Actions: In 2012, President Obama signed a memorandum forming an  Interagency Working Group on the Intersection of HIV/AIDS, Violence against Women and Girls, and Gender-Related Health Disparities and in 2013, signed an Executive Order launching the HIV Care Continuum Initiative. The recommendations from these initiatives have increased our focus on this areas, and they have been fully integrated into the Update.


HIV Care Continuum Data Indicate Areas of Greatest Need:

	Despite these advances, there is still an HIV epidemic and it remains a significant health issue for the United States. Today, 1.2 million people in the United States are living with HIV and the most recent national estimates point to areas where further improvements are needed.


Awareness of Status: An estimated 1 in 8 people living with HIV in the United States are unaware of their infection and, thus, are not receiving regular medical care to manage the disease. Many individuals are also diagnosed late. In 2013, 24 percent of persons diagnosed with HIV had a stage 3 (AIDS) classification at the time of diagnosis.

Linkage to care: Being linked to HIV care as soon as possible after diagnosis allows people with HIV to gain the full benefits of early treatment. Yet, issues such as poverty; unemployment; intimate partner violence; unstable housing, including homelessness; hunger; lack of access to transportation; and other issues often prevent people from accessing the health care they need. In 2013, 82 percent of those newly diagnosed with HIV infection, were linked to HIV medical care within 3 months of their diagnosis.

Engagement in care: For people living with HIV, staying engaged in medical care is an important precursor to becoming virally suppressed. Key social and structural supports are necessary to make it possible for affected individuals to visit a medical provider, take medications, and stay healthy. Yet, in 2012, only 39 percent of all persons living with HIV infection were engaged in care.

Viral suppression: Being virally suppressed—which means that HIV is under control at a level that keeps people healthy and reduces the risk of transmitting the virus to others—not only improves a person with HIV’s health and enhances their lifespan; it also significantly reduces their risk of transmitting HIV to partners. In 2012, only 30 percent of all persons living with HIV infection in the United States achieved viral suppression.


	These data clearly indicate areas where increased attention is needed to ensure that all individuals living with HIV in the U.S. are aware of their infection and able to realize the full benefits of available care and treatment.

Indicators of Progress toward 2020:

	Responding to these challenges and taking full advantage of the many advances requires a more coordinated national response to HIV in the United States. Together, by aligning Federal and community efforts on the principles and priorities detailed in the updated Strategy, we aim to achieve the following outcomes by 2020:


		Increase the percentage of people living with HIV who know their serostatus to at least 90 percent.

		Reduce the number of new diagnoses by at least 25 percent.

		Reduce the percentage of young gay and bisexual men who have engaged in HIV-risk behaviors by at least 10 percent.

		Increase the percentage of newly diagnosed persons linked to HIV medical care within one month of diagnosis to at least 85 percent.

		Increase the percentage of persons with diagnosed HIV infection who are retained in HIV medical care to at least 90 percent.

		Increase the percentage of persons with diagnosed HIV infection who are virally suppressed to at least 80 percent.

		Reduce the percentage of persons in HIV medical care who are homeless to no more than 5 percent.

		Reduce the death rate among persons with diagnosed HIV infection by at least 33 percent.

		Reduce disparities in the rate of new diagnoses by at least 15 percent in the following groups: gay and bisexual men, young Black gay and bisexual men, Black women, and persons living in the Southern United States.

		Increase the percentage of youth and persons who inject drugs with diagnosed HIV infection who are virally suppressed to at least 80 percent.


	To guide implementation of the updated Strategy across the U.S. government, the many Federal agencies and offices engaged in HIV activities will develop a Federal Action Plan detailing the specific steps they will take to implement the priorities set by the Update. The Federal Action Plan will be released in December.

	An action plan framework, similar to the Federal Action Plan structure, will be created to assist other stakeholders—such as state, Tribal, and local governments, community-based organizations, coalitions of persons living with HIV, the scientific and medical communities, faith communities, schools and universities, industry, philanthropy, and other stakeholders—in developing their own action plans, tailored to their own specific missions and priorities.

	By working together to achieve the outcomes of the updated Strategy, Federal and community partners will bring us closer to realizing the Strategy’s vision:

The United States will become a place where new HIV infections are rare, and when they do occur, every person, regardless of age, gender, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender identity, or socio-economic circumstance will have unfettered access to high quality, life-extending care, free from stigma and discrimination.
