The United States and Japan have built a strategic partnership that encompasses a wide range of shared global priorities.  Today the partnership is a fitting reflection of the common interests, capabilities and values of our two countries as we work together to address challenges around the world.  The United States and Japan reaffirm their commitment to enhance their longstanding partnership as follows:
Expanding Bilateral Economic and People-to-People Ties
The United States and Japan are two of the world’s largest economic powers – accounting for nearly 30 percent of global GDP – and our economies are deeply intertwined through trade and investment.  This deep economic integration has been an extraordinarily positive force for job creation, wage growth, innovation, and enhanced prosperity for both countries.  To further develop those bonds, the United States and Japan endeavor to:


		Further deepen our economic ties.  In 2014, our two-way goods and services trade was $279 billion.  The United States has accumulated foreign direct investment in Japan of $123 billion, while Japan is the second largest foreign investor in the United States, with investment stock of nearly $350 billion. 

		Enhance cooperation and collaboration between SelectUSA and Invest Japan, noting the importance of our strong and growing bilateral investment relationship.

		Facilitate expedited travel by Japan’s participation in the U.S. Global Entry Program and U.S. participation in Japan’s Trusted Traveler Program.

		Expand cooperation in infrastructure development in our respective countries including high speed rail projects, recognizing the importance of developing high speed rail as an investment in the future growth of our economies.

		Continue to strengthen people-to-people ties, including efforts to increase student, research, and legislative exchanges. Welcome the “KAKEHASHI Initiative toward the Future” and the “TOMODACHI Initiative,” and continued efforts by the U.S.-Japan Conference on Cultural and Educational Interchange, which inspired the “Team Up” campaign to promote university-to-university partnerships and programs by the Japan Foundation.

Harnessing Science, Technology, and Innovation for Our Future
Together, the United States and Japan are drawing upon the technical skills and resources of our two nations to:
a. Science, Technology, and Innovation


		Enhance our cooperation on vital research issues, such as biomedical research, robotics, materials research, and computer and information science and engineering, in close cooperation with academic institutions, government research and development institutions, industry, and through the U.S. – Japan Joint High Level Committee on science and technology, based on the U.S.-Japan Science and Technology Agreement, extended in 2014.

		Pursue working together to explore ways to better address the challenges of aging societies by harnessing new technologies and developing innovations.

b. Space


		Reaffirm commitment to secure the responsible, peaceful, and safe use of space.

		Enhance space cooperation from a broad, inclusive, and strategic perspective including through the whole-of-government U.S.-Japan Comprehensive Dialogue on Space with the next session to be held later this year in Tokyo.

		Underscore the importance of continued utilization of the International Space Station, and ensure close cooperation for the next International Space Exploration Forum.

		Increase cooperation in both space science and Earth observation, including meteorology, and in Earth science to address global environmental and climate challenges.

		Recognize continued cooperation on the joint NASA-JAXA Global Precipitation Measurement mission and on global carbon measurements through the agreement with regard to the Orbital Carbon Observatory-2 Satellite and the Greenhouse Gases Observing Satellite-1 and 2 missions.

		Cooperate on a Global Change Observation Mission follow-on mission to avoid a gap in availability of data required for global weather forecasting.

		Strengthen the resilience and interoperability of critical space systems, focusing on: space-based positioning, navigation, and timing; enhanced space situational awareness; use of space for maritime domain awareness; research and development in space technologies; and use of hosted payloads.

		Support international efforts to develop transparency and confidence-building measures to encourage responsible actions in, and the peaceful use of, space, such as an International Code of Conduct for Outer Space Activities.

c.       Cyber and the Internet Economy


		Strengthen and expand our robust cooperation on cyber issues and the Internet Economy. 

		Reaffirm commitment to an open, interoperable, secure and reliable cyberspace, to the multi-stakeholder model of Internet governance for ensuring the free flow of information, and to Internet Freedom principles as outlined by the Freedom Online Coalition.

		Hold the next whole-of government U.S.-Japan Cyber Dialogue and the next U.S.-Japan Policy Cooperation Dialogue on the Internet Economy this year; and coordinate closely ahead of relevant international fora such as the International Telecommunication Union and the United Nations General Assembly.

		Increase sharing of information about cyber incidents and threats, including the state-sponsored cyber-enabled theft of intellectual property, trade secrets, or other confidential business information intended to provide competitive advantages to a state’s companies or commercial sector.

		Re-affirm our commitment to the recommendations of the 2013 United Nations Group of Governmental Experts on Information Security.

		Affirm that states should uphold additional, voluntary norms of state behavior in cyberspace during peacetime, recognizing that these norms should be consistent with existing international law.  In particular, the United States and Japan share the view that states should not conduct or knowingly support online activity that intentionally damages critical infrastructure or otherwise impairs the use of critical infrastructure to provide services to the public.  The United States and Japan commit to continued discussions to identify specific peacetime cyber norms, noting that wide affirmation among states would contribute to international stability in cyberspace.

		Strengthen whole-of-government cooperation on critical infrastructure cybersecurity, with an emphasis on preparations for the 2020 Olympics and Paralympics, and mission assurance.

		Seek to enhance global resilience of critical infrastructure through the promotion of principles like those in the National Institute of Standards and Technology Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity.

		Share information on threats and vulnerabilities in cyberspace and best practices in organizing, training, and equipping defense forces for the cyber mission.

d.     Energy


		Strengthen civil nuclear cooperation through the U.S.-Japan Bilateral Commission including in such areas as civil nuclear energy research and development, nuclear security, decommissioning and environmental management, emergency management, and safety and regulatory issues, with a common view that nuclear energy is an important base-load power source that will contribute to reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.  Continue expert workshops, technical exchanges and involvement by U.S. companies and Department of Energy national laboratories that have contributed to the cleanup of the Fukushima Daiichi plant site and the surrounding area.

		Enhance dialogue on energy, through bilateral discussions on strategic implications and on technical coordination, including through the U.S.-Japan Energy Strategic Dialogue and U.S.-Japan Energy Policy Dialogue.

		Welcome the prospect of U.S. liquefied natural gas exports in the future since additional global supplies will benefit Japan and other strategic partners.

		 Following on the 2014 Nuclear Security Summit (NSS), and for the success of the next NSS to be held in 2016, continue joint efforts on various initiatives.  In particular, work together to remove all highly enriched uranium and plutonium fuel from the Fast Critical Assembly in Japan in 2016.

		Welcome the entry into force on April 15 of the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage, and work together to encourage other states to join.

		Strengthen bilateral and multilateral collaboration in the field of clean energy technologies to create a low-carbon society by concluding an Implementing Arrangement concerning cooperation in Research and Development in Energy and Related fields, a Memorandum of Cooperation concerning collaboration in the field of Carbon Capture and Storage, and an extension of the Hawaii-Okinawa Partnership on Clean and Efficient Energy Development and Deployment, as well as by working together at the Clean Energy Ministerial and Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation.

		Continue U.S.-Japan scientific collaboration on methane hydrate research.

Cooperating to Promote Regional and Global Stability
Recognizing that a secure and stable environment makes possible all of the important work we do together, the United States and Japan seek to:
a.      U.N. Peacekeeping


		Enhance our cooperation on peacekeeping capacity building through such activities as the United States’ African Peacekeeping Rapid Response Partnership and the Japan-UN Project for Rapid Deployment of Engineering Capabilities in Africa.　

b.      Maritime Security


		Foster respect for international law, including the freedom of navigation and overflight, as well as peaceful settlement of maritime disputes.

		Coordinate capacity building assistance for maritime safety and security in the Asia-Pacific region.

		Strengthen regional cooperation to combat piracy and armed robbery against ships through Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP).

c. Countering Terrorism and Violent Extremism (CVE)


		Take a comprehensive approach against terrorist activities and violent extremism.

		Support the U.S. initiative to host the CVE Summit and to launch the Global Community Engagement and Resilience Fund.

		Support Japan’s efforts to: strengthen counter-terrorism measures through capacity building assistance for border control in the Middle East/Africa region; enhance diplomacy towards stability and prosperity in the Middle East; and assist in creating societies resilient to radicalization by reducing income disparity and promoting youth employment and education.

Working Together to Promote Sustainable Development around the World
The United States and Japan are dedicated to advancing sustainable development, prosperity, and equality globally by taking joint action to:
a.      Development Cooperation


		Strengthen mutual collaboration and coordination with our development partners to ensure a successful Third International Conference on Financing for Development.

		Seek international agreement on an ambitious post-2015 Development Agenda that builds on the momentum of the Millennium Development Goals and serves as a powerful instrument to eradicate extreme poverty and foster sustainable global development. 

		Promote collaboration on global development, including in Africa, to improve food security, support health and education, increase access to electricity, and further the aims and outcomes of the Tokyo International Conference on African Development.

		Continue working together to support Myanmar’s reform efforts through a new “Initiative to Promote Fundamental Labour Rights and Practices in Myanmar”, launched in November 2014 to improve environments related to labor rights, along with Myanmar, Denmark and the International Labor Organization.

		Highlight the importance of allocating more of total assistance where needs are greatest and capacity to raise public resources domestically weakest, including least developed countries, low income countries, small island developing states, land-locked developing countries, and fragile and conflict-affected states.

		Further advance cooperation in the area of disaster risk reduction including collaboration for the Association of Southeast Asian Nation’s capacity building in this area, building on the successful outcomes of the Third United Nations World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction and the Memorandum of Cooperation signed in December 2014 between the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the Cabinet Office of Japan.

b.      Environment and Climate Change


		Work together and with others to achieve a successful climate change agreement at the 21st Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Conference (COP21) in Paris.

		Mindful of the 2 ℃ goal, note U.S. announcement of its post-2020 target on March 31 to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 26 to 28 percent in 2025, and affirm that Japan intends to submit an ambitious target, as early as possible and well in advance of the COP21.  Both sides acknowledge the need to accelerate the transition to low-carbon economies.  

		Work together in assisting countries vulnerable to climate change by appropriate means such as the Green Climate Fund.

		Support the adoption of a Montreal Protocol amendment to phase down hydrofluorocarbons.

		Issue a statement this year regarding cooperation on conservation and sustainable use of marine fisheries resources, and thus global food security, including through joint efforts to combat illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing.

		Work together to secure robust marine fisheries provisions in the Trans-Pacific Partnership  agreement.

		Work to contribute to the objective of the Minamata Convention on Mercury by exploring opportunities for cooperation in collaboration with the Global Environment Facility. 

		Work to alleviate air pollution in the Asia-Pacific region envisioning possible collaboration with local governments to improve and certify their air quality levels.

		Cooperate in assisting partner countries to create and implement environmental education programs.

		Take full advantage of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Administrator’s intended visit to Tokyo later this year to meet with Japan’s Minister of the Environment to advance this environmental cooperation.

c. Empowerment of Women and Girls


		Cooperate to empower women in Southeast Asia and Africa through such activities as business development programs in Ethiopia and business-to-business networking events through the United States’ African Women’s Entrepreneurship Program and Japan’s Business Women’s Entrepreneurship Program. 

		Welcome collaboration between the “World Assembly for Women in Tokyo (WAW!)” and the Equal Futures Partnership.

		Support training and empowerment of women and girls in Afghanistan including through cooperation between the U.S. Agency for International Development and the Japan International Cooperation Agency on the PROMOTE Program.

		Support girls’ education globally, including through: Japan’s community-based “School for All” concept; the United States’ “Let Girls Learn” initiative; renewed cooperation between the Peace Corps and Japan Overseas Cooperation Volunteers; increased focus and resources in respective bilateral assistance programs, including in Southeast Asia; and support for NGO work.

d. Global Health


		Cooperate on global health by combatting infectious diseases, including through the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and by promoting maternal and child health.

		Continue partnering to fully end the Ebola epidemic in West Africa, rebuild sustainable health systems in the affected countries, and work together to capture lessons learned from the Ebola crisis to strengthen health systems in the Asia-Pacific Region.

		To advance the Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA), the United States is to partner with 30 countries, and Japan is to positively consider partnering with 3-5 countries to achieve the GHSA targets and action packages it has committed, and to spur progress toward full implementation of the World Health Organization’s International Health Regulations so that partner countries can prevent, detect, and rapidly respond to infectious disease threats.  The United States and Japan are to work together and with partner nations to determine this set of countries and to synchronize global health security capacity building toward these common targets.

The partnership between the United States and Japan brings peace and prosperity, health and environmental protection, and advanced technology to the people of our two countries and to the world.  These efforts will continue to deepen and expand in line with the ever closer ties between the United States and Japan.
Great Falls Elementary School
	Great Falls, Virginia
11:11 A.M. EDT
MRS. OBAMA:  Hello, everyone.  And Konichiwa -- was that okay?  (Laughter.) 
Well, first let me thank Principal Lonnett for introducing me, and for all of the staff, the teachers, the superintendent, the board, everyone for creating such a thoughtful visit for us.  It was so impressive.  You all are so impressive.  As I was saying to the sixth graders who presented to us, this is -- we’re so proud of you.  You have really, really demonstrated a level of understanding of the culture and the language. 
And this couldn’t be a better welcome for me and for Mrs. Abe.  And you guys are playing an important role in bringing our two countries even closer together, and you should be very, very, very proud of yourselves.  So let’s -- give yourselves a round of applause.  (Applause.)  And to Dr. Garza, I know you are proud.  This is just a wonderful display. 
And of course, I want to say a very special thank you to a woman who has become a dear friend, who was a wonderful host to me during my visit.  I’m thrilled to have her, her husband, the Prime Minister, here to the White House to celebrate our friendship -- Mrs. Abe.  (Applause.) 
But I’m so happy to be here at Great Falls Elementary School.  I can’t say it enough -- we’re so proud of you guys.  We’re proud of those taiko drummers who were performing.  You guys were amazing.  That was awesome!  So powerful.  (Applause.)  And we’re so proud of all you are learning -- for all the things you’re learning about the Japanese culture and building a friendship with a school in Japan.  And I understand that some of you are going to be visiting Japan in June, is that correct?  Are you excited about that visit? 
STUDENTS:  Yes. 
MRS. OBAMA:  Yes, it should be good.
And I don’t know if you know that I traveled to Japan myself last month, and I truly loved every minute of my visit.  I got to visit some beautiful temples.  I ate some delicious Japanese food.  I went to Mrs. Abe’s restaurant and we had a wonderful lunch.  I enjoyed spending time with Mrs. Abe and with the Prime Minister, and together, Mr. and Mrs. Abe and the President and I are working on some really important issues, like girls’ education.  So we had an opportunity to talk about that and further those partnerships.
And I got to meet with a group of young people just like all of you.  And I had such a great time with those kids in Japan, as I’m having here with you.  And I could have spent all day talking and laughing and learning about their lives.  But one of the most important things that I learned talking to the wonderful kids in Japan was that -- and I know you guys are learning this too -- but while there may be some differences between our countries –- maybe we speak different languages and eat different foods -- but we have so much in common.
Just like all of you, kids in Japan like to hang out with their friends and have fun.  They like sports and they like music, they like reading.  They like all the wonderful things you guys do here.
So my wish for all of you and for young people across America is that you have the chance to engage with kids from other parts of the world, that you learn about each other’s lives, that you understand one another’s hopes and dreams so that you can truly see for yourselves firsthand just how much we all have in common around the world. 
And that’s why we’re so proud to be here at Great Falls, because the curriculum that you’re developing, ensuring that these students walk away with competency in at least two languages, that they get to experience and travel in other parts of the world -- that is truly the model that we all should be living up to in educating our kids here in the United States.
Because all of that work that you all are doing here is so important, because, as the President always says, building friendships between people is how we truly build friendships between entire countries.  It’s through the work that you’re doing.  You guys are the true ambassadors.  And I don’t want you to ever underestimate that, especially when you go to Japan.  You are going to be showing the best of America to one of our most important partners.
For example, as I said, Japan is one of America’s best friends in the world.  And when you learn about Japanese culture and languages, and you get to know kids from Japan, you’re helping to strengthen that friendship. 
And here’s the thing -- thanks to the wonders of technology, you don’t have to get on a plane and fly all the way around the world to do this.  If you have a computer these days, you can just connect with the click of a button to kids across the globe.  By going online, or checking out a book from the library, you’ll find all kinds of information about any country in the world.  You can learn their language, you can learn about their food, you can learn about their customs -- anything you’re curious about.
And by learning about Japan here at Great Falls Elementary, you all have already started your global journey.  And what’s so wonderful about global learning is that there is so much more for you to see and to discover.  The world is so big and it’s so interesting.  One of the best things that I get to do as First Lady is to travel around the world.  And there are all kinds of amazing people out there for you to meet and to learn and to understand.
So I hope that you all keep learning; that that hunger for learning about other cultures and reaching out and learning other languages, that you take that with you for the rest of your lives, okay?  Because you’ve got a good foundation here, right?  You guys are very lucky to go to the school that you go to and to have the teachers who care so much about you, and to have parents who know the importance of investing in a multicultural education.
So I want you all to keep working hard.  And promise me that you’ll do that, okay?  Do I hear a yes?
STUDENTS:  Yes.
MRS. OBAMA:  That’s better.  (Laughter.)  So now, it is my pleasure to introduce someone who shares my passion about inspiring our young people, someone who was such a wonderful host to me when I visited her country last month, someone who is both my dear friend and a very good friend of this particular school.  So now, will you join me in offering a warm welcome to Mrs. Abe.  (Applause.) 
MRS. ABE:  Konichiwa.
STUDENTS:  Konichiwa. 
MRS. ABE:  (As interpreted.)  Good morning, everyone.  I’m very pleased to visit the Great Falls Elementary School today for the first time in many years, and meet you all.  And I’m also very honored that First Lady Michelle kindly joined me to the visit to the school.
And I’m also very pleased to have a wonderful welcome when I visit here.  And you are still starting to learn Japanese, but I heard a very wonderful Japanese song.  And thank you very much for your welcome and performance.  And I have just visited the Japanese immersion class before coming here, and I’m very pleased to hear the wonderful Japanese in a beautiful accent.  And thank you very much for your great performance at the class, as well.
As Michelle said, Japan and the U.S. is a very, very important, friendly country.  Many Japanese have been yearning for the U.S. and wanting to be like the U.S. for many years.  And I’m also very proud of the fact that many American children are interested in Japanese cultures, such as animation and comics and manga.  And with this opportunity, I hope you have more interest in Japan and you will touch upon the different aspect of Japanese culture in the future.   
Last year, I visited New York in order to attend the U.N. General Assembly.  And taking this opportunity, I had the pleasure to meet Michelle for the first time.  We became very good friends immediately because we share a lot of interests and concerns. 
And then I had the pleasure to welcome Michelle to Japan in March.  We both confirmed that we will work very hard for promoting girls’ education in the future.  And also, we attended the event together for promoting girls’ education.  There, young Japanese girls got together there, and also we had, together, the opportunity to discuss with the Japanese girls.
And Michelle was listening to the individual remark one by one quite seriously, facing to each people’s face.  And everyone was very pleased to meet Michelle, and also, there were a lot of feedbacks after the event.  They are very encouraged by Michelle, and they said they would like to work very hard in the future.  They definitely began to like the U.S., and they will work very hard in the future more with -- bearing the encouragement of Michelle in mind. 
Taking the opportunity of today’s great event, I hope that you will have further interest in Japan.  Every year, I welcome the students as well as staff and parents of the Great Falls Elementary School to the Prime Minister’s official residence.  And I’m very looking forward to meeting you all, with a lot of fun plans to welcome you.  And for those who are not taking Japanese immersion program, I also welcome you to visit to Japan. 
And I would like to reiterate my sincere appreciation for those who worked very hard to make this event possible.  And also, I would like to reach the further development of friendly relationship between Japan and the U.S., and also I would like to reach the further development of this elementary school.  Wishing so, I would like to close my remark.
Thank you very much.  (Applause.) 
PRICIPAL LONNETT:  As you can see, a great deal of preparation went into making today a success.  And we’ve prepared a few questions in advance.  We’re going to have three questions today, the first of which will go to Mrs. Abe.  The second will go to Mrs. Obama.  And finally, we will have a question that they both will answer.  Our questions will be asked by the students, and they’ll say them first in English and then in Japanese. 
Can we please have our students who are asking questions rise?  And our first question is for Mrs. Abe.
Q    (As interpreted.)  What is your favorite type of plant?
MRS. ABE:  (As interpreted.)  My favorite plant is cherry blossom tree, and there are many cherry blossom trees in Washington, as well.  And I have one, big cherry blossom tree in front of my house, and whenever I have some worries and difficulties, I always talk to the tree with crying.  (Laughter.)
Q    Arigato. 
Q    My name is Josie (ph).  How was your trip to Japan last month?
MRS. OBAMA:  I had a wonderful time in Japan.  As I said, it was terrific getting to spend time with Mrs. Abe.  But I also got to see some taiko drummers there, and they were amazing, when I went to Kyoto.  I had an opportunity to meet the Emperor and Empress, and that was a very, very powerful and meaningful visit.  I had an opportunity to have lunch with Mrs. Abe at her restaurant.  She owns her own restaurant.  And she grows her rice, and she has organic, wonderful cooking.  And we had sake -- but don’t tell the President and the Prime Minister.  (Laughter.)  But we had a lot of fun. 
And for those of you who haven’t visited Japan before, it’s just an amazing, amazing country.  And there’s such warmth and hospitality.  And I hope to go back and take my girls, who didn’t have a chance to visit, to go with me on my visit in March.  So I hope that they, like many of you here, get to have an opportunity to spend some time in Japan.
Q    Thank you.
MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you. 
Q    (As interpreted.)  Do you like gardening?
MRS. OBAMA:  I do.  The White House has a White House Kitchen Garden.  And Mrs. Abe and I, when we leave here, I’m going to get to show her our garden.  We just planted our garden, and we have help from students in the area.  This year, because it was the fifth anniversary of planting our garden, we invited kids from all over the country who represent the programs that work with Let’s Move!, which is my initiative to make sure that you kids get active and stay healthy.
But we planted broccoli, and spinach, and lettuce, and bok choy.  We always plant lots of herbs.  We have planted corn before.  We’ve gotten pumpkins from our garden.  We have a fig tree.  We’ve tried to grow berries but the birds and the squirrels always get to them before we do, so we’re trying to figure that out.  We’ve grown rice, and potatoes, and wheat.
So we’ve been able to produce a lot of delicious food from our Kitchen Garden.  And we use the food -- we eat the food, our family.  The chefs at the White House use the vegetables from the garden to cook our meals almost every night.  And when we have a state visit like today, -- although we have a guest chef, Morimoto, who is a famous Japanese chef who is cooking tonight.  But we usually use vegetables from the garden as much as possible.
And then the vegetables that we don’t use we donate to food shelters, because we want to make sure that people who don’t have access to food because they don’t have the means, that they get healthy food, too. 
So we produce thousands of pounds of food each year.  And we also have a bee hive.  We have honeys, and we produce a lot of White House honey.  So they’re good bees.  They haven’t stung anyone yet that I know of. 
So thank you for the question.   
Q    Thank you.  (Applause.) 
END
	11:33 A.M. EDT
Rose Garden
12:10 P.M. EDT
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Good morning, everybody.  Please have a seat.  Good afternoon.  Konnichiwa.  Once again, it is an honor to welcome my partner and friend, Prime Minister Abe, back to the White House.  I’m told there’s a phrase in Japanese culture that speaks to the spirit that brings us together today.  It’s an idea rooted in loyalty.  It’s an expression of mutuality, respect and shared obligation.  It transcends any specific moment or challenge.  It’s the foundation of a relationship that endures.  It’s what allows us to say that the United States and Japan stand together.  Otagai no tame ni -- “with and for each other.”
This is the essence of the alliance between the United States and Japan -- an alliance that holds lessons for the world.  Prime Minister Abe and I had the opportunity yesterday to visit our memorial to President Lincoln, who believed that a great conflict had to be followed with reconciliation.  Shinzo, on behalf of the American people, I want to thank you for your visit to Arlington National Cemetery.  Your gesture is a powerful reminder that the past can be overcome, former adversaries can become the closest of allies, and that nations can build a future together.
Across seven decades, our nations have become not just allies, but true partners and friends.  And that mutual affection will be on display tomorrow when Shinzo becomes the first Japanese Prime Minister to address a joint meeting of Congress.  And we are two global partners that stand together for security and human dignity around the world -- opposing Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, providing relief to innocent civilians threatened by ISIL, combating Ebola and promoting global health, and now offering help to the people of Nepal, who are in our prayers today.
This friendship includes my partnership with Prime Minister Abe.  Since taking office, I’ve worked to rebalance American foreign policy to ensure that we’re playing a larger and lasting role in the Asia Pacific -- a policy grounded in our treaty alliances, including our treaty with Japan.  And I’m grateful to Shinzo for his deep commitment to that alliance.  He is pursuing a vision of Japan where the Japanese economy is reinvigorated and where Japan makes greater contributions to security and peace in the region and around the world.  So, Shinzo, thank you.  I believe the progress we’ve made today will help to guide the U.S.-Japanese partnership for decades to come.
Specifically, we first talked about transforming our security alliance.  For the first time in nearly two decades, we’ve updated the guidelines for our defense cooperation.  Together, our forces will be more flexible and better prepared to cooperate on a range of challenges, from maritime security to disaster response.  Our forces will plan, train and operate even more closely.  We’ll expand our cooperation, including on cyber threats and in space.  And Japan will take on greater roles and responsibilities in the Asia Pacific and around the world.
Our new guidelines complement our effort to realign U.S. forces across the region, including on Okinawa, in order to lessen the impact of our bases on local communities.  And I reaffirmed our commitment to move forward with the relocation of Marines from Okinawa to Guam. 
I want to reiterate that our treaty commitment to Japan’s security is absolute, and that Article 5 covers all territories under Japan’s administration, including Senkaku Islands.  We share a concern about China’s land reclamation and construction activities in the South China Sea, and the United States and Japan are united in our commitment to freedom of navigation, respect for international law, and the peaceful resolution of disputes without coercion.
We also remain united in pursuit of peaceful denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and addressing North Korean provocations.  We fully support Japan’s efforts to resolve the tragedy of North Korea’s abduction of Japanese citizens.  During my last visit to Japan, I met with the mother of one of those abductees and she described the awful pain that she has endured, so I know how important this is to the Japanese people.  Meanwhile, our growing trilateral cooperation -- with the Republic of Korea, as well as with Australia -- gives us new opportunities to enhance security across the region.
With respect to trade, we reviewed the progress our teams have made towards the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  I know that the politics around trade can be hard in both our countries.  But I know that Prime Minister Abe, like me, is deeply committed to getting this done, and I’m confident we will.  I often point out, for example, that there are many Japanese cars in America.  I want to see more American cars in Japan, as well.  TPP will help level the playing field.  It will be good for the workers of both our countries.
	 
	And moreover, TPP will have strong protections for workers and the environment and help us set high standards for trade in the 21st century.  Japan and the United States both operate with high standards in our companies and our corporations.  We try to be responsible when it comes to corporate citizenship.  And high standards will be good for us and good for the region.
Based on the progress we've made, Prime Minister Abe and I discussed how the United States and Japan, as the two largest economies in the TPP negotiations, will now work together to lead our TPP partners to swift and successful conclusions of the broader negotiations. 
We also agreed to continue our close coordination on climate change.  As the two countries that have made the largest pledges to the Green Climate Fund, we’re committed to helping nations around the world seize the opportunities of transitioning to low-carbon economies.  And we discussed the importance of all major economies submitting ambitious targets to reduce emissions so we can reach a strong climate agreement this year in Paris.
And finally, we agreed to keep investing in our people so that they and our countries can reach their full potential.  I want to once again commend the Prime Minister for his efforts to bring more Japanese women into the workforce.  I can tell you it is very much my view here in the United States and around the world that when women are given opportunity, when they are full-fledged members of the political community and the economic community, when they have opportunity, those countries succeed.  It’s good for everybody. 
Along with the initiative we launched last year in Tokyo, we’re also aiming to double student exchanges in the coming years.  And with the leadership of our better halves -- our wives -- the United States and Japan are helping to lead our global initiative, Let Girls Learn, to give more young women and girls access to education. 
So these are just some examples of what it means to be true global partners.  And I’m confident that with the steps that we’ve taken today, our alliance will play an even greater role in upholding security, prosperity and human dignity -- not just in the Asia Pacific, but around the world. 
So, Prime Minister Abe, arigato gozaimasu.  Mr. Prime Minister.
PRIME MINISTER ABE:  (As interpreted.)  Barack, thank you for inviting me to make an official visit in this commemorative year which marks 70 years after the war.  Thank you for inviting me and my wife.
Walking together with you at the Lincoln Memorial, which has witnessed America tread the path of democracy, will be an extraordinary memory to be cherished.  We have a dream -- that is to create a world abound in peace and prosperity.  To realize this common dream, Japan and the United States will together pave the way towards a new era.
I was able to confirm this strong resolve with President Obama in this milestone year of 70 years after the war.  Today, we turned a new page in the history of the U.S.-Japan alliance, which exceeds half a century.  This is a Japan-U.S. alliance within the context of the world.  Japan and the United States are partners who share basic values, such as freedom, democracy, and basic human rights, and the rule of law.  The U.S.-Japan alliance characterized by the firmness of its bond is now indispensable to the peace and stability of not only the Asia Pacific but to the world.
We are united in our resoluteness in opposing unilateral attempts to change the status quo in whatever form.  Any dispute should be resolved peacefully based on international law and not through coercion or intimidation.  Japan welcomes the United States policy of rebalancing, which emphasizes the Asia Pacific.  And President Obama has expressed his support for Japan’s principle of proactive contribution to peace.  Through coordination of these two policies, the deterrence of our alliance will no doubt be further strengthened.
Against this backdrop, we have reaffirmed our resolve to steadily move forward with the realignment of the U.S. forces in Japan.  The dangers arising from the Futenma Air Station being surrounded by housing and schools should be eliminated by relocation to Henoko as soon as possible.  We will move forward with mitigating the impact of the base in Okinawa, founded on a strong relationship of trust between Japan and the United States.  It is prosperity that brings peace.  These beliefs make us eager to see the early conclusion of the TPP.
On the bilateral outstanding issues, we welcome the fact that significant progress was made.  We will continue to cooperate to lead the TPP talks through its last phase.  We’ve confirmed that we would work together for the early and successful conclusion of the talks. 
In addition, with regard to the situation in East Asia, abduction by North Korea, nuclear missile issues, the situation in the Ukraine, the nuclear issue in Iran, and the threat of terrorism; furthermore, climate change, infectious and communicable diseases, the U.N. Security Council reform -- the world has a multitude of issues facing it.  And on these all sorts of issues, we have had a frank and candid exchange of views and we agreed that we would cooperate.
When it comes to the future of Japan and the United States, there are infinite possibilities -- energy, infrastructure, science and technology, space, and, in addition to this, the empowerment of women.  We agree that is between President Obama and myself that we would cooperate and move forward in making investments for the future. 
I would like to express my due heartfelt respect once again to President Obama and the citizens of the United States who have committed to take on the multitude of challenges of this world and for the unstinting efforts that you are making for the benefit of the peoples of the world.
Yesterday, I visited the JFK Library in Boston.  On television, I saw President Kennedy deliver his inauguration speech; it deeply resonated with me and it still has a lingering effect.  I recall the following quote:  “My fellow citizens of the world, ask not what America will do for you, but what together we can do for the freedom of mankind.” 
Now, Japan wants to be a country that can respond to such calls.  Hand in hand, we want to work together with the United States to spread basic values throughout the world such as those of freedom, democracy, basic human rights and the rule of law.  And we want to be a country that can contribute to peace and prosperity of the world.
In visiting the United States, I’ve had a very heartwarming welcome and reception by all citizens of the United States.  I’d like to express my heartfelt gratitude.
Lastly, I’d like to emphasize the following.  Barack, as we stand here, we will be starting a new era for Japan and the United States.  I think that 70 years from now, our children and grandchildren will look back on the talks we had as one of such historical significance.  Thank you very much.
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Starting with Andrew Beatty of AFP.
Q    Thank you very much, Mr. President.  First of all, I wanted to know if you think there’s a risk in this more assertive U.S.-Japanese security stands -- if you think there’s a risk that it might be seen as a provocation in Beijing, Pyongyang, or heightened tension in the East China and South China Seas.
And for Mr. Abe, if I may -- you stopped short of a full apology for Japan’s actions during World War II, including with regard the estimated 200,000 women enslaved by Imperial Forces.  Would you make an apology for that today?  Thank you.
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  I think it’s very important to recognize that the U.S.-Japan alliance hasn’t just been good for the United States and Japan; it’s been good for the Asia Pacific region and the world. 
The basic foundation of peace, stability, ensuring that territorial borders were respected, freedom of navigation -- all that has underwritten the incredible growth that’s taken place in the Asia Pacific region.  China has benefitted from it.  It’s on that basis that China became an economic juggernaut that ended up being incorporated into global trade. 
And so, no, we don’t think that a strong U.S.-Japan alliance should be seen as a provocation.  It should be seen as a continuation of the important work that we’ve done to ensure that you have a stable area where there are diplomatic conflicts, a healthy economic competition.  But, largely, we’ve been able to maintain forward progress for a whole host of nations, and our treaty alliances have been critical to that.  The U.S. serving as an Asia Pacific power has been critical to that. 
And as I’ve said before, we welcome China’s peaceful rise.  We think it’s good not only because China is a booming potential market.  We think it’s good not only because it allows China potentially to share some burdens with us in helping countries that are not as far along develop.  But we think it’s just good that hundreds of millions of Chinese citizens have been able to rise out of poverty at incredible speed over the last several years.  They could not have done that had it not been for a stable trading system and world order that is underwritten in large part by the work that our alliances do.
I think it is going to be important for us to continue to adapt to new challenges.  So part of the goal here is that the same principles that the alliance was founded on continually update to concerns about cyber threats; that we are nimble and responsive to potential conflicts that may arise because of maritime disputes.  But I think we have to do it in a way that brings China and other countries into a common effort to maintain order and peace in the region.
And we are seeking to strengthen military-to-military cooperation with China even as we continue to upgrade our alliance efforts.  Obviously, the Republic of Korea is a critical part of our alliance structure, as well.  And the trilateral work that we do is going to be also very, very important. 
I don't want to minimize, though, the fact that there are some real tensions that have arisen with China around its approach to maritime issues and its claims.  But that's not an issue that is arising as a consequence of the U.S.-Japan alliance.  It’s primarily a conflict between China and various claimants throughout East Asia and Southeast Asia in which they feel that rather than resolve these issues through normal international dispute settlements, they are flexing their muscles. 
And we’ve said to China what we would say to any country in that circumstance:  That's the wrong way to go about it.  And we will continue to work with all countries in the region, starting with our treaty allies, to make sure that basic international norms continue to be observed.
PRIME MINISTER ABE:  (As interpreted.)  On the issue of comfort women, I am deeply pained to think about the comfort women who experienced immeasurable pain and suffering as a result of victimization due to human trafficking.  This is a feeling that I share equally with my predecessors.  The Abe Cabinet upholds the Kono Statement and has no intention to revise it.  Based on this position, Japan has made various efforts to provide realistic relief for the comfort women.
Throughout the history of the 20th century, women’s dignity and basic human rights had often been infringed upon during wars.  We intend to make the 21st century a world with no human rights violations against women. 
I promised at the General Assembly of the United Nations last year that Japan would stand at the fore and lead the international community in eliminating sexual violence during conflicts.  For an international framework, including the U.N. Women, Japan provided approximately $12 million in 2014 and decided that it would provide approximately $22 million in 2015.
In any case, the 21st century should be an age where women’s rights is never infringed upon.  And that is our strong resolve. 
Q    (As interpreted.)  Thank you very much.  I’m from NHK.  I’d like to address this question to Prime Minister Abe and President Obama.  In the East China Sea and in the South China Sea, China continues to make forays into the oceans.  And the Islamic State is still very active.  How does the United States and Japan intend to collaborate? 
And what do you expect of each other in terms of actions taken by the respective countries?  In Japan, with regard to the acceptance of exercise of collective self-defense and the new guidelines, there is a strong concern that Japan will become involved in America’s wars.  How does Prime Minister Abe intend to dispel those fears?  And what is President Obama’s take on these concerns?
PRIME MINISTER ABE:  (As interpreted.)  First of all, on extremism and radicalism, which is on the rise, the world community should unite to counter such extremism.  Moderation is the best method, is the speech I delivered in Cairo.  We have to face extremism.  There are moderates who are at the very forefront are facing extremism, and we want to support this.
With the rise of extremism, there are refugees and support to these refugees.  And also, through the influx of refugees, there are countries who are faced with difficulties.  To these countries, it’s important that we provide support appropriately.  And to the moderate countries, we need to tell them that they are not alone, they are not isolated in the international society.  The moderate countries should be supported, and we need to express that at all times.  I believe that is important.
In the Middle East, there are people who are living there; improving the welfare and livelihood of these people are areas in which we’d like to make efforts.  From such a standpoint, the United States and Japan would like to cooperate to respond to the challenges.
Another point.  The defense guidelines and with regard to the security legislation that we may be involved, get caught up in wars -- people tend to label this in some cases.  It’s very unfortunate.  Labeling activities of this kind is not the first time it has occurred.  In 1960, when we revised the security treaty, some people said that we would be involved in wars of the United States, and that was the core of the criticism which was aired then. 
It's been 55 years since then.  This criticism has been proved totally wrong, and that is very clear and evident.  History has proved this.  Our choice made at the time to revise the security treaty.  And in case Japan suffers from aggression between Japan and the United States, we would respond through cooperation.
And in the Far East, to maintain security, Japan’s facilities would be leveraged and U.S. military would leverage these facilities to conduct activities.  Through such activities, Japan’s safety was protected and prosperity happened, and safety in the Asia Pacific has been maintained. 
To further strengthen this trend, it is provided for through the new guidelines, and seamless response is made possible.  And by so doing, the deterrence would be enhanced.  The Japan-U.S. alliance would be more efficient and more functional.  Deterrence and response capabilities would be heighted as a result.  And this would lead to peace and prosperity of Japan, and regional peace and prosperity as well.  This is my firm conviction. 
In the streamlining of the laws, I should like to explain to the citizens -- and the Parliament -- in a detailed fashion. 
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Ultimately, the people of Japan and their elected representatives will be making decisions about how best to approach their defense.  But I think it's important to note, as Prime Minister Abe said, that we have seen over multiple decades now that Japan is a peace-loving country having absorbed some very difficult lessons from the past.  Japan does not engage in aggression on the international stage, or in its region.  And that the alliance that has been built with the United States is principally one that seeks to defend our countries from potential attack or aggression.
And what the new defense guidelines, and the collective defense approach that Prime Minister Abe is proposing, it simply upgrades our ability to carry out those core functions.  We do share, as people in countries all around the world share, a determination to eliminate the kind of barbaric terrorist acts perpetrated by organizations like ISIL that have resulted in the death of innocent citizens from the United States, from Japan, from other countries and, most of all, from Muslim countries. 
And that’s why we have a broad-based coalition designed to defeat ISIL.  And we will continue to work with a wide range of countries around the world in our counterterrorism efforts. 
Japan’s cooperation in that is vital and appreciated, but there are many ways in which coalition members participate.  Japan’s willingness and commitment to provide humanitarian assistance makes an enormous difference in countries that have been destabilized.  Japan’s willingness to serve in areas of peacekeeping and working with other countries to rebuild after they’ve been destroyed makes a big difference. 
So I think it's important to recognize we do not expect some instant and major transformation in terms of how Japan projects military power, but we do expect that Japan, like all of our allies and like ourselves, will continue to adapt to new threats, understanding that our basic core principle is not territorial ambition, it's not aggression towards others, but it is simply to defend prosperity and liberty and the sovereignty of countries, as we have done for a very long time now -- as we have done together for a very long time.
Chris Jansing.
Q    Thank you, Mr. President.  As you know, the National Guard is now on the streets of Baltimore -- the latest aftermath in a series of what have been high-profile confrontations between black men and police officers.  And there seems to be growing frustration among African American leaders that not enough is being done quickly enough.  Marc Morial of the Urban League said, “The U.S. is in a state of emergency of tremendous proportions.”  The president of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund says, “We are in the throes of a national crisis.” 
Are we in the throes of a national crisis?  What are you prepared to do about it, both in terms of Baltimore and the larger picture?  And what do you say to critics who say that since the death of Trayvon Martin, you have not been aggressive enough in your response? 
And to Prime Minister Abe, how important is a Pacific trade deal to keeping the influence of China in check, both economically and militarily?  And do you agree with President Obama when he says that failing to complete a deal will simply further China’s influence?  Thank you.
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Before I answer the question about Baltimore, I’m going to horn in on your question to Prime Minister Abe.
I’ve been very clear that TPP is good for American businesses and American workers, regardless of what China is doing.  And we will make the case on the merits as to why it will open up markets for American goods, American exports, and create American jobs.  So this is not simply a defensive agreement, this is something that is going to be part and parcel of our broader economic agenda moving forward.  And when 95 percent of the world’s markets are outside our shores, we’ve got to make sure that we’re out there competing.  And I’m confident we can compete.
With respect to Baltimore, let me make a couple of points.  First, obviously our thoughts continue to be with the family of Freddie Gray.  Understandably, they want answers.  And DOJ has opened an investigation.  It is working with local law enforcement to find out exactly what happened, and I think there should be full transparency and accountability.
Second, my thoughts are with the police officers who were injured in last night’s disturbances.  It underscores that that’s a tough job and we have to keep that in mind, and my hope is that they can heal and get back to work as soon as possible.
Point number three, there’s no excuse for the kind of violence that we saw yesterday.  It is counterproductive.  When individuals get crowbars and start prying open doors to loot, they’re not protesting, they’re not making a statement -- they’re stealing.  When they burn down a building, they’re committing arson.  And they’re destroying and undermining businesses and opportunities in their own communities that rob jobs and opportunity from people in that area.
So it is entirely appropriate that the mayor of Baltimore, who I spoke to yesterday, and the governor, who I spoke to yesterday, work to stop that kind of senseless violence and destruction.  That is not a protest.  That is not a statement.  It’s people -- a handful of people taking advantage of a situation for their own purposes, and they need to be treated as criminals.
Point number four, the violence that happened yesterday distracted from the fact that you had seen multiple days of peaceful protests that were focused on entirely legitimate concerns of these communities in Baltimore, led by clergy and community leaders.  And they were constructive and they were thoughtful, and frankly, didn’t get that much attention.  And one burning building will be looped on television over and over and over again, and the thousands of demonstrators who did it the right way I think have been lost in the discussion. 
The overwhelming majority of the community in Baltimore I think have handled this appropriately, expressing real concern and outrage over the possibility that our laws were not applied evenly in the case of Mr. Gray, and that accountability needs to exist.  And I think we have to give them credit.  My understanding is, is you’ve got some of the same organizers now going back into these communities to try to clean up in the aftermath of a handful of criminals and thugs who tore up the place.  What they were doing, what those community leaders and clergy and others were doing, that is a statement.  That’s the kind of organizing that needs to take place if we’re going to tackle this problem.  And they deserve credit for it, and we should be lifting them up.
Point number five -- and I’ve got six, because this is important.  Since Ferguson, and the task force that we put together, we have seen too many instances of what appears to be police officers interacting with individuals -- primarily African American, often poor -- in ways that have raised troubling questions.  And it comes up, it seems like, once a week now, or once every couple of weeks.  And so I think it’s pretty understandable why the leaders of civil rights organizations but, more importantly, moms and dads across the country, might start saying this is a crisis.  What I’d say is this has been a slow-rolling crisis.  This has been going on for a long time.  This is not new, and we shouldn’t pretend that it’s new.
The good news is, is that perhaps there’s some newfound awareness because of social media and video cameras and so forth that there are problems and challenges when it comes to how policing and our laws are applied in certain communities, and we have to pay attention to it and respond. 
What’s also good news is the task force that was made up of law enforcement and community activists that we brought together here in the White House have come up with very constructive concrete proposals that, if adopted by local communities and by states and by counties, by law enforcement generally, would make a difference.  It wouldn’t solve every problem, but would make a concrete difference in rebuilding trust and making sure that the overwhelming majority of effective, honest and fair law enforcement officers, that they're able to do their job better because it will weed out or retrain or put a stop to those handful who may be not doing what they're supposed to be doing.
Now, the challenge for us as the federal government is, is that we don't run these police forces.  I can't federalize every police force in the country and force them to retrain.  But what I can do is to start working with them collaboratively so that they can begin this process of change themselves. 
And coming out of the task force that we put together, we're now working with local communities.  The Department of Justice has just announced a grant program for those jurisdictions that want to purchase body cameras.  We are going to be issuing grants for those jurisdictions that are prepared to start trying to implement some of the new training and data collection and other things that can make a difference.  And we're going to keep on working with those local jurisdictions so that they can begin to make the changes that are necessary. 
I think it’s going to be important for organizations like the Fraternal Order of Police and other police unions and organization to acknowledge that this is not good for police.  We have to own up to the fact that occasionally there are going to be problems here, just as there are in every other occupation.  There are some bad politicians who are corrupt.  There are folks in the business community or on Wall Street who don't do the right thing.  Well, there’s some police who aren’t doing the right thing.  And rather than close ranks, what we’ve seen is a number of thoughtful police chiefs and commissioners and others recognize they got to get their arms around this thing and work together with the community to solve the problem.  And we're committed to facilitating that process.
So the heads of our COPS agency that helps with community policing, they're already out in Baltimore.  Our Assistant Attorney General for the Civil Rights Division is already out in Baltimore.  But we're going to be working systematically with every city and jurisdiction around the country to try to help them implement some solutions that we know work. 
And I’ll make my final point -- I’m sorry, Mr. Prime Minister, but this is a pretty important issue for us. 
We can't just leave this to the police.  I think there are police departments that have to do some soul searching.  I think there are some communities that have to do some soul searching.  But I think we, as a country, have to do some soul searching.  This is not new.  It’s been going on for decades. 
And without making any excuses for criminal activities that take place in these communities, what we also know is that if you have impoverished communities that have been stripped away of opportunity, where children are born into abject poverty; they’ve got parents -- often because of substance-abuse problems or incarceration or lack of education themselves -- can't do right by their kids; if it’s more likely that those kids end up in jail or dead, than they go to college.  In communities where there are no fathers who can provide guidance to young men; communities where there’s no investment, and manufacturing has been stripped away; and drugs have flooded the community, and the drug industry ends up being the primary employer for a whole lot of folks -- in those environments, if we think that we're just going to send the police to do the dirty work of containing the problems that arise there without as a nation and as a society saying what can we do to change those communities, to help lift up those communities and give those kids opportunity, then we're not going to solve this problem.  And we’ll go through the same cycles of periodic conflicts between the police and communities and the occasional riots in the streets, and everybody will feign concern until it goes away, and then we go about our business as usual.
If we are serious about solving this problem, then we're going to not only have to help the police, we're going to have to think about what can we do -- the rest of us -- to make sure that we're providing early education to these kids; to make sure that we're reforming our criminal justice system so it’s not just a pipeline from schools to prisons; so that we're not rendering men in these communities unemployable because of a felony record for a nonviolent drug offense; that we're making investments so that they can get the training they need to find jobs.  That's hard.  That requires more than just the occasional news report or task force.  And there’s a bunch of my agenda that would make a difference right now in that.
Now, I’m under no illusion that out of this Congress we're going to get massive investments in urban communities, and so we’ll try to find areas where we can make a difference around school reform and around job training, and around some investments in infrastructure in these communities trying to attract new businesses in.
But if we really want to solve the problem, if our society really wanted to solve the problem, we could.  It’s just it would require everybody saying this is important, this is significant -- and that we don't just pay attention to these communities when a CVS burns, and we don't just pay attention when a young man gets shot or has his spine snapped.  We're paying attention all the time because we consider those kids our kids, and we think they're important.  And they shouldn’t be living in poverty and violence. 
That's how I feel.  I think there are a lot of good-meaning people around the country that feel that way.  But that kind of political mobilization I think we haven’t seen in quite some time.  And what I’ve tried to do is to promote those ideas that would make a difference.  But I think we all understand that the politics of that are tough because it’s easy to ignore those problems or to treat them just as a law and order issue, as opposed to a broader social issue.
That was a really long answer, but I felt pretty strongly about it.
PRIME MINISTER ABE:  (As interpreted.)  First of all, on TPP, this is not something that we create out of consciousness about China.  The economic growth of the region will be positive and create opportunities for Japan, the United States and the world.  The TPP is such that to the eyes of many countries it has to become a model.  It should be a model for China in that it's an ambitious attempt to create a new economic sphere in which people, goods, and money will flow freely within the Asia Pacific region.  It's a new economic region of freedom, democracy, basic human rights, and rule of law. 
With countries that share these universal values, we will be creating new rules.  This will benefit regional prosperity and it also has a strategic significance related to regional stability. 
On these points, we see completely eye to eye between President Obama and myself.  The early conclusion of TPP -- by achieving this, this will work on other countries -- non-members of the TPP -- to follow rules.  And I believe that this will lead to prosperity.
Q    (As interpreted.)  My question is addressed to Prime Minister Abe, as well as President Obama.  In relation to the answer that has been given, China is working toward the establishment of the AIIB, and it intends to enhance its influence in the international economy and finance.  What is the strategic significance of the early conclusion of the TPP? 
And the next question is to President Obama.  Do you have confidence, or how do you intend to work on Congress to pass the TPP-related bills?  And how confident are you that you’ll be able to pass this bill?
PRIME MINISTER ABE:  (As interpreted.)  On the TPP, as I mentioned in my answer previously, in the Asia Pacific region this is a region where growth is very prominent.  And in such a region, for people and goods and money under proper rules to flow freely, without a doubt we’ll make affluent the countries participating in the TPP, in the Asia Pacific.  And the people in the countries will be able to lead affluent lives.  I believe this will feed into this.
So for this purpose as well, as soon as possible, with the general public’s understanding, toward early conclusion of the TPP, we’d like to make efforts.  And in this context, Japan and the United States -- or with President Barack Obama and myself -- we want to exert leadership to bring about an early conclusion of the TPP. 
Furthermore, on the AIIB, in Asia there’s a tremendous demand for infrastructure, and the financial system to respond to this is very important.  On this recognition, we see eye to eye between China and myself, and I think this is a point on which we see eye to eye between many countries.
For Japan to participate in the AIIB is a decision that which we have not taken yet.  But to create such an enormous financial institution and since this will have an enormous impact on Asian countries, a fair governance is necessary of the institution.  In particular, the board to review individual projects and to approve of this is indispensable.  And that sustainability, and the environment and society and the impact of this should be considered.  We need to secure this.
It’s not only about the lenders, but the borrowing nations.  For example, various infrastructure projects may not be sustainable.  It may have too much of a burden on the environment.  If this is the case, this will be a very negative -- bring negative results for the citizens living in the countries.  It will prove to be a burden.  And so in that sense, a proper review as to whether lending the money to a country will be of benefit to the country.  Rigorous review is very important.
So from such a standpoint, the two points to be secured I believe is very important.  So from such a standpoint, Japan and the United States should cooperate, and we need to continue dialogue with China -- and it is my intention to do so.
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Let me agree with Prime Minister Abe when it comes to the Asian Infrastructure Bank proposal that's been made by China.
Asia needs infrastructure.  There are a lot of countries that have difficulty financing infrastructure, but if they got that infrastructure put in place and developed, they can grow much more rapidly.  And that's good for everybody.  It’s good for that country.  It’s good for the world economy.  It’s good for us.  We want more markets to be able to get our goods in and sell our services that are some of the best in the world.  And China has got a lot of money.  It’s been running a big surplus for quite some time.  So to the extent that China wants to put capital into development projects around the region, that's a positive.  That's a good thing.
So let me be very clear and dispel this notion that we were opposed or are opposed to other countries participating in the Asia Infrastructure Bank.  That is simply not true.  It sprung up out of one story after the Brits decided that they were going to join up, and then folks have just been running with it.  And there have been all these editorials subsequently based on these reports -- not from any official position of the United States government, but from a series of behind-the-scenes quotes.
What we have said and what we said to all the other countries involved is exactly what Prime Minister Abe said, which is, if we're going to have a multilateral lending institution, then you have to have some guidelines by which it’s going to operate.  That's how the World Bank operates.  That's how the IMF operates.  There may be weighted votes in terms of who’s the biggest contributor, but you've got to have some transparency in terms of how the thing is going to operate -- because if not, a number of things can happen.  Number one, money could end up flowing that is misused, or it doesn't have high accounting standards, and we don't know what happens to money that is going into projects.
As Prime Minister Abe said, the projects themselves may not be well-designed.  They may be very good for the leaders of some countries and contractors, but may not be good for the actual people who live there.  And the reason I can say that is because, in the past, some of the efforts of multilateral institutions that the United States set up didn't always do right by the actual people in those countries.  And we learned some lessons from that, and we got better at making sure that we were listening to the community and thinking about how this would affect the environment, and whether it was sustainable.
And so our simple point to everybody in these conversations around the Asia Infrastructure Bank is let’s just make sure that we're running it based on best practices, based on what we’ve learned from the entire post-war era and how other multilateral financing mechanisms have worked.
And if, in fact, the Asia Infrastructure Bank that is being set up ends up having those kinds of safeguards, is run in a way that ultimately is actually going to lead to good infrastructure and benefit the borrowing countries, then we're all for it.  And we look forward to collaborating with the Asia Infrastructure Bank, just like we do with the Asia Development Bank and with the World Bank on a whole bunch of stuff.  So this could be a positive thing.
But if it’s not run well, then it could be a negative thing.  And what we don't want to do is just be participating in something and providing cover for an institution that does not end up doing right by its people.  Because when these countries borrow money, even from a development bank, for a boondoggle project that doesn’t work, they’re oftentimes still on the hook for paying that money back.  And there have been experiences like that across continents and across decades. 
With respect to TPP, it’s never fun passing a trade bill in this town because people are understandably concerned about its potential impacts on specific industries but also the general concerns that people have had about globalization and technology displacing workers.  We’re addressing those systematically.  Here’s what I’m confident about:  This will end up being the most progressive trade bill in history.  It will have the kinds of labor and environmental and human rights protections that have been absent in previous agreements.  It’s going to be enforceable.  It’s going to open up markets that currently are not fully open to U.S. businesses.  It’s going to be good for the U.S. economy. 
And because I always believe that good policy ends up being good politics, I’m confident we’re going to end up getting the votes in Congress.  And Congress, by the way, will have a lot of time to review it when and if it’s actually completed.  So this whole notion that it’s all secret, they’re going to have 60 days before I even sign it to look at the text, and then a number of months after that before they have to take a final vote.
Thank you very much, everybody.
END
	1:09 P.M. EDT
Today the United States and Japan honor a partnership that for seven decades has made enduring contributions to global peace, security, and prosperity.  In this year which marks 70 years since the end of World War II, the relationship between our two countries stands as a model of the power of reconciliation:  former adversaries who have become steadfast allies and who work together to advance common interests and universal values in Asia and globally.  Together we have helped to build a strong rules-based international order, based on a commitment to rules, norms and institutions that are the foundation of global affairs and our way of life. 
This transformation into a robust alliance and global partnership was not inevitable.  Generations of people from all walks of life built the relationship between our countries over time, working in the belief that the experiences of the past should inform but not constrain the possibilities for the future.  This endeavor has brought the United States and Japan to where we stand today:  two of the world’s leading economies, advancing regional prosperity through a mutually beneficial economic partnership, anchored by an unshakeable Alliance that is the cornerstone of peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region and a platform for global cooperation.  The journey our two countries have traveled demonstrates that reconciliation is possible when all sides are devoted to achieving it.
Over the past 70 years, the U.S.-Japan relationship has successfully grown and adapted to challenges and significant changes in the international system.  Together we helped to win the Cold War and manage its aftermath; we have worked together to fight terrorism after the September 11, 2001 attacks; we cooperated to strengthen the international financial architecture following the global financial crisis; we responded to natural disasters such as the tragic Great East Japan Earthquake and tsunami of March 11, 2011; we have confronted North Korean nuclear and missile threats, as well as human rights abuses and abductions; we have worked together to address concerns about Iran’s nuclear program; and we have cooperated to address complex transnational challenges.
Today’s meeting between President Obama and Prime Minister Abe marks a historic step forward in transforming the U.S.-Japan partnership.  Through the United States’ Asia-Pacific Rebalance strategy, and Japan’s policy of “Proactive Contribution to Peace” based on the principle of international cooperation, we are working closely together to ensure a peaceful and prosperous future for the region and the world.  We recognize that the security and prosperity of our two countries in the 21st century is intertwined, inseparable, and not defined solely by national borders.  Our current and future commitments to each other and to the international order reflect that reality.
The United States and Japan are committed to a transparent, rules-based, and progressive approach in pursuing the prosperity of the region.  Our leadership in this area encompasses trade and investment through the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), development cooperation, and internet governance. The United States and Japan are leading efforts to set the rules for trade and investment, both in the dynamic and fast-growing Asia-Pacific region and around the world.  As the two largest economies in TPP, we are working to finalize the most high-standard trade agreement ever negotiated.  TPP will drive economic growth and prosperity in both countries and throughout the Asia-Pacific region by supporting more jobs, raising wages, and reinforcing our work together on a range of long term strategic objectives, including the promotion of regional peace and stability. We welcome the significant progress that has been made in the bilateral negotiations and reaffirm our commitment to work together to achieve a swift and successful conclusion to the broader agreement.
The new Guidelines for U.S-Japan Defense Cooperation will transform the Alliance, reinforce deterrence, and ensure that we can address security challenges, new and old, for the long term.  The new Guidelines will update our respective roles and missions within the Alliance and enable Japan to expand its contributions to regional and global security.  The new Guidelines will enable us to work more closely on issues including maritime security, and to partner with other countries that share our aspirations, in the region and beyond.  As we strengthen an Alliance that has become global in reach, the United States stands resolute and unwavering in all of its commitments under the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty, based upon a stable, long-term U.S. military presence in Japan. 
The United States and Japan are building a partnership that addresses global challenges.  Our agenda is broad:  we will work together to address climate change and environmental degradation, one of the greatest threats facing humanity; to further strengthen our economies and to promote strong, sustainable and balanced global growth; to deliver secure, affordable, sustainable and safe energy; to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development; to promote human security; to counter violent extremism; to strengthen the NPT regime to achieve the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons; to promote global trade and investment; to combat epidemics and threats to global health; to advance scientific inquiry and promote resilience in space; to ensure the safe and stable use of cyber space based on the free flow of information and an open internet; to promote disaster risk reduction and relieve those afflicted by natural disasters and humanitarian emergencies; to advance human rights and universal freedoms; to promote girls education and empower women and girls around the world; and to strengthen U.N. peacekeeping.  The United States looks forward to a reformed U.N. Security Council that includes Japan as a permanent member.  Seventy years ago this partnership was unimaginable.  Today it is a fitting reflection of our shared interests, capabilities and values.
As we work to expand our global cooperation, we will be guided by shared principles:


		Respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity;

		Commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes without coercion;

		Support for democracy, human rights, and the rule of law;

		Expansion of economic prosperity, through open markets, free trade, transparent rules and regulations, and high labor and environmental standards;

		Promotion of globally recognized norms of behavior in shared domains, including the freedom of navigation and overflight, based upon international law;

		Advancement of strong regional and global institutions; and

		Support for trilateral and multilateral cooperation among like-minded partners. 

Today the international order faces fresh challenges, ranging from violent extremism to cyber attacks.  State actions that undermine respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity by attempting to unilaterally change the status quo by force or coercion pose challenges to the international order.  Such threats put at risk much that we have built.  We must and will adapt again, working in concert with other allies and partners.  But we also have before us exciting opportunities to raise our collaboration to a new level, in areas like science and technology, energy, infrastructure, and arts and culture.  The spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship in these and other areas, supported by public-private collaboration, will continue to be the driving force of economic growth and prosperity in our two countries.  The benefits of our work in these diverse fields will be global in reach.  As we move forward, we will actively promote people-to-people exchange as a key pillar of our relationship, especially among younger generations.  We take up these challenges and opportunities, knowing that the strength and resilience of our 70-year partnership will ensure our success in the decades ahead.  
