
	“We are the only advanced country on Earth that doesn’t guarantee paid sick leave or paid maternity leave to our workers. . . . And that forces too many parents to make the gut-wrenching choice between a paycheck and a sick kid at home.”
	
		– President Barack Obama, State of the Union Address, January 20, 2015


	 

	In most families today, both parents work and have responsibilities caring for their children, aging parents, or family members with disabilities.  Yet the fundamental structure of work has not kept pace with the changing American family, and many families are struggling to balance obligations at home and on the job. As a result, too many workers are unable to take the time they need to recover from an illness. Many workers will go to work sick, putting their coworkers and customers at risk of illness. Many parents are forced to choose between taking an unpaid day off work—losing much needed income and potentially threatening their jobs—and sending a sick child who should be home in bed to school.

	Today, the President will sign an Executive Order requiring federal contractors to offer their employees up to seven days of paid sick leave per year.  He will travel to Boston to renew his call on Congress to pass legislation expanding paid sick and family leave, and announce new Department of Labor rules giving federal contract workers new tools to demand equal pay. Last November, Massachusetts voters overwhelmingly approved a new paid sick leave law that went into effect statewide on July 1, and in April the Boston City Council passed an ordinance creating six weeks of paid parental leave for City of Boston employees.

	Today’s actions build on a number of previous steps taken by the President to expand access to paid leave. In January, he issued a Presidential Memorandum directing the federal government to advance up to six weeks of paid sick leave in connection with the birth or adoption of a child, or for other sick leave eligible uses, and called on Congress to pass legislation giving federal employees six additional weeks of paid parental leave. The President’s FY 2016 budget also includes over $2 billion in funds to encourage states to establish paid family and medical leave programs that would ensure new parents can stay home to care for their children and allow for caregiving leave like eldercare or self-care related to a serious illness.

	EXPANDING SICK LEAVE AND OTHER ACTIONS FOR WORKERS

1. Guaranteeing Sick Leave for Federal Contract Workers: An estimated 44 million private sector workers – about 40 percent of the total private-sector workforce – do not have access to paid sick leave.  Low- and middle-income workers are much less likely to have paid sick leave than high-income workers. While roughly 60 percent of workers are eligible under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) to take unpaid, job-protected leave for family and medical reasons for more extended absences, many workers are without coverage for shorter-term health care needs and others may not be able to afford to stay home sick if it means the loss of pay.

	Just as importantly, a body of research shows that offering paid sick days and paid family leave can benefit employers by reducing turnover and increasing productivity.  Paid sick days would help reduce lost productivity due to the spread of illness in the workplace. These policies can benefit our economy by fostering a more productive workforce.

	For this reason, it is no surprise that many businesses see the benefit of employees earning sick days. Many private sector employers have voluntarily changed their policies to expand paid leave for their employees, and in some cases, even for employees of their contractors and vendors. A survey of employers in Connecticut, which passed a law in 2011 requiring many employers to allow workers to earn sick leave, found that most businesses reported “no effects or modest effects of the new law on the bottom line.”

	The Executive Order the President will sign today will:


Give approximately 300,000 people working on federal contracts the new ability to earn up to seven days of paid sick leave each year. Additional workers will gain access to more sick leave than they had before. Beginning with new contracts in 2017, workers will earn a minimum of one hour of paid sick leave for every 30 hours worked (though contractors would be free to offer more generous amounts at their discretion);



Allow workers to use paid sick leave to care for themselves, a family member, such as a child, parent, spouse, or domestic partner, or another loved one, as well as for absences resulting from domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking;



Improve the health and performance of employees of federal contractors and bring benefits packages offered by federal contractors in line with leading firms, ensuring they remain competitive in the search for dedicated and talented employees; and



Protect the public health of employees of federal contractors, their customers, and clients by ensuring employees are allowed to stay home when they have communicable diseases.


	 

2. Calling on Congress to Expand Leave to Millions More Workers: In addition to issuing today’s Executive Order, the President is renewing his call for Congress to pass the Healthy Families Act, which would require all businesses with 15 or more employees to offer up to 7 paid sick days each year. He is calling for the passage of federal legislation guaranteeing every working American paid family and medical leave to care for a new child, a seriously ill family member, or their own serious illness. The FAMILY Act is one such proposal. Additionally, the President is calling on states and cities to follow the example of Massachusetts and other leaders and pass similar laws expanding paid leave. The Department of Labor is also releasing a report, “The Cost of Doing Nothing,” that explores the costs to workers, families, businesses, and the nation of not taking action to expand paid family and medical leave to millions of workers without it today.

3. Strengthening Rights to Equal Pay: Women are the primary breadwinners in 40 percent of U.S. children, but the typical woman makes about 78 percent of what the typical man makes – which means less for families’ everyday needs, less for investments in our children’s futures, and, when added over a lifetime of work, substantially less for retirement. The President is announcing that this week the Department of Labor will publish a final rule prohibiting federal contractors from discriminating against employees and job applicants who choose to discuss their compensation. The rule – issued under an April 2014 Executive Order – does not compel workers to discuss pay. However, it provides a critical tool to encourage pay transparency, and make it easier for workers to recognize pay discrimination and seek appropriate remedies.

	BUILDING ON A RECORD OF GROWING THE MIDDLE CLASS

	Providing families the security of paid leave is just one piece of the President’s plan to support America’s workers and grow the middle class. The President believes that all Americans should have the opportunity to succeed in our global economy and all working families should be able to afford the cornerstones of economic security. Middle class economics has helped to make America stronger over the past six years, with our businesses creating 13.1 million new jobs over a record 66 straight months of job growth. President Obama is pursuing policies that will ensure a growing economy — one with opportunities for employment, higher wages, higher incomes, fairer pay for women, workplace flexibility for parents, affordable health insurance, and adequate retirement benefits.

Overtime


		In June, the President announced that the Department of Labor would propose extending overtime pay protections to almost 5 million workers through a rule that would entitle most salaried workers earning less than a projected $50,400 next year to the Fair Labor Standards Act’s overtime protections. The proposed rule will prevent a future erosion of overtime rights and ensure greater predictability by automatically updating the salary threshold in the future. It will help promote higher take-home pay and allow workers to better balance their work and family obligations. In so doing, it will help shore up the middle class and provide an easier pathway for those aspiring to share in the standard of living it affords.


	 

Higher Wages


		President Obama has called on Congress to raise the national minimum wage, and took action by signing an Executive Order to raise the minimum wage to $10.10 for workers on covered federal contracts. Since early 2013, when the President first called for a minimum wage increase, 17 states and the District of Columbia have passed increases to their minimum wage, which benefit an estimated 7 million workers as of 2017. Many other cities and localities, such as Chicago, Los Angeles, and Louisville, have also passed minimum wage increases, while businesses across the country have taken steps on their own to raise wages for their workers.


	 

Tax Cuts for the Middle Class


		In his first term, President Obama cut taxes for the average middle-class family by $3,600. The American Taxpayer Relief Act, which President Obama signed into law in 2012, permanently lowered income tax rates for 98 percent of American workers.



		President Obama enacted improvements to the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and the Child Tax Credit (CTC) that are helping 16 million working families make ends meet, and he continues to fight to make them permanent.


	 

College Affordability


		Over the past six years, the President and Congress have provided millions of low- income and middle class families across the country access to college by increasing the maximum Pell Grant award by $1,000, and total funding by 70 percent.



		Families putting a child through college became eligible for as much as $10,000 of additional help over four years from the President’s American Opportunity Tax Credit, the equivalent of nearly a 30-percent discount on tuition at a typical state university.



		Taken together, these scholarships will provide students and families $50 billion in aid next year to help them afford college.


	 

Equal Pay


		The first bill President Obama signed into law was the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Restoration Act, which empowers women to recover wages lost to discrimination by extending the time period in which an employee can file a claim. The President continues to advocate for passage of the Paycheck Fairness Act, common sense legislation that would give women additional tools to fight pay discrimination.



		In April 2014, the President signed two executive actions strengthening equal pay laws: the Executive Order behind this week’s final rule prohibiting federal contractors from discriminating against employees and job applicants who choose to discuss their compensation, and a Presidential Memorandum instructing the Secretary of Labor to propose a rule requiring federal contractors to submit summary data on compensation paid to their employees and to use such data to enhance enforcement.


Workplace Flexibility


		In June 2014, the White House held the first-ever Summit on Working Families, elevating a national conversation about making today’s workplaces work for everyone, and signed a Presidential Memorandum to enhance workplace flexibilities and work-life balances for federal employees.


	 

Promoting Fair Pay and Safe Workplaces


		In July 2014, President Obama signed an Executive Order that helps agencies better take into account prospective federal contractors’ records of compliance with key labor and employment laws when awarding contracts. It also ensures that federal contract workers are given the necessary information each pay period to verify the accuracy of their paycheck, and that workers who may have been sexually assaulted or had their civil rights violated get their day in court by putting an end to certain mandatory arbitration agreements.


	 

Affordable Health Insurance


		Five years ago, the Affordable Care Act became law — opening the doors to affordable, quality health insurance for millions of people. Today:
		
			 


				More than 16 million Americans have gained health coverage,

				Up to 30 million young adults can no longer be denied coverage or charged higher premiums for a pre-existing condition,

				105 million Americans no longer have a lifetime limit on their health coverage,

				137 million Americans are guaranteed preventive care coverage, and

				The nation’s uninsured rate now stands at its lowest level ever.




Security in Retirement


		In February 2015, the Department of Labor published a proposed rule protecting retirement savers by ensuring that investment advisors are free from conflicts that prevent them from acting in the best interests of their clients. This is a commonsense rule that protects those saving for retirement from being steered into investments that are in their advisors’ financial interest but not theirs.


	 

	EXECUTIVE ORDER
	- - - - - - -
	ESTABLISHING PAID SICK LEAVE FOR FEDERAL CONTRACTORS

	By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including 40 U.S.C. 121, and in order to promote economy and efficiency in procurement by contracting with sources that allow their employees to earn paid sick leave, it is hereby ordered as follows:

	Section 1. Policy. This order seeks to increase efficiency and cost savings in the work performed by parties that contract with the Federal Government by ensuring that employees on those contracts can earn up to 7 days or more of paid sick leave annually, including paid leave allowing for family care. Providing access to paid sick leave will improve the health and performance of employees of Federal contractors and bring benefits packages at Federal contractors in line with model employers, ensuring that they remain competitive employers in the search for dedicated and talented employees. These savings and quality improvements will lead to improved economy and efficiency in Government procurement.

	Sec. 2. Establishing paid sick leave for Federal contractors and subcontractors. (a) Executive departments and agencies (agencies) shall, to the extent permitted by law, ensure that new contracts, contract-like instruments, and solicitations (collectively referred to as "contracts"), as described in section 6 of this order, include a clause, which the contractor and any subcontractors shall incorporate into lower-tier subcontracts, specifying, as a condition of payment, that all employees, in the performance of the contract or any
	subcontract thereunder, shall earn not less than 1 hour of paid sick leave for every 30 hours worked.

	(b) A contractor may not set a limit on the total accrual of paid sick leave per year, or at any point in time, at less than 56 hours.
	(c) Paid sick leave earned under this order may be used by an employee for an absence resulting from:


	(i) physical or mental illness, injury, or medical condition;
	(ii) obtaining diagnosis, care, or preventive care from a health care provider;
	(iii) caring for a child, a parent, a spouse, a domestic partner, or any other individual related by blood or affinity whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship who has any of the conditions or needs for diagnosis, care, or preventive care described in paragraphs (i) or (ii) of this subsection or is otherwise in need of care;or (iv) domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking, if the time absent from work is for the purposes otherwise described in paragraphs (i) and (ii) of this subsection, to obtain additional counseling, to seek relocation, to seek assistance from a victim services organization, to take related legal action, including preparation for or participation in any related civil or criminal legal proceeding, or to assist an individual related to the employee as described in paragraph

	(iii) of this subsection in engaging in any of these activities.


	(d) Paid sick leave accrued under this order shall carry over from 1 year to the next and shall be reinstated for employees rehired by a covered contractor within 12 months after a job separation.
	(e) The use of paid sick leave cannot be made contingent on the requesting employee finding a replacement to cover any work time to be missed.
	(f) The paid sick leave required by this order is in addition to a contractor's obligations under 41 U.S.C. chapter 67 (Service Contract Act) and 40 U.S.C. chapter 31, subchapter IV (Davis-Bacon Act), and contractors may not receive credit toward their prevailing wage or fringe benefit obligations under those Acts for any paid sick leave provided in satisfaction of the requirements of this order.
	(g) A contractor's existing paid leave policy provided in addition to the fulfillment of Service Contract Act or Davis-Bacon Act obligations, if applicable, and made available to all covered employees will satisfy the requirements of this order if the amount of paid leave is sufficient to meet the requirements of this section and if it may be used for the same purposes and under the same conditions described herein.
	(h) Paid sick leave shall be provided upon the oral or written request of an employee that includes the expected duration of the leave, and is made at least 7 calendar days in advance where the need for the leave is foreseeable, and in other cases as soon as is practicable.


	(i) Certification.


	(i) A contractor may only require certification issued by a health care provider for paid sick leave used for the purposes listed in subsections (c)(i), (c)(ii), or (c)(iii) of this section for employee absences of 3 or more consecutive workdays, to be provided no later than 30 days from the first day of the leave.


	(ii) If 3 or more consecutive days of paid sick leave is used for the purposes listed in subsection (c)(iv) of this section, documentation may be required to be provided from an appropriate individual or organization with the minimum necessary information establishing a need for the employee to be absent from work. The contractor shall not disclose any verification information and shall maintain confidentiality about the domestic violence, sexual assault, or stalking, unless the employee consents or when disclosure is required by law.


	(j) Nothing in this order shall require a covered contractor to make a financial payment to an employee upon a separation from employment for accrued sick leave that has not been used, but unused leave is subject to reinstatement as prescribed in subsection (d) of this section.
	(k) A covered contractor may not interfere with or in any other manner discriminate against an employee for taking, or attempting to take, paid sick leave as provided for under this order or in any manner asserting, or assisting any other employee in asserting, any right or claim related to this order.
	(l) Nothing in this order shall excuse noncompliance with or supersede any applicable Federal or State law, any applicable law or municipal ordinance, or a collective bargaining agreement requiring greater paid sick leave or leave rights than those established under this order.


	Sec. 3. Regulations and Implementation. (a) The Secretary of Labor (Secretary) shall issue such regulations by September 30, 2016, as are deemed necessary and appropriate to carry out this order, to the extent permitted by law and consistent with the requirements of 40 U.S.C. 121, including providing exclusions from the requirements set forth in this order where appropriate; defining terms used in this order; and requiring contractors to make, keep, and preserve such employee records as the Secretary deems necessary and appropriate for the enforcement of the provisions of this order or the regulations thereunder. To the extent permitted by law, within 60 days of the Secretary issuing such regulations, the Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council shall issue regulations in the Federal Acquisition Regulation to provide for inclusion in Federal procurement solicitations and contracts subject to this order the contract clause described in section 2(a) of this order.


	(b) Within 60 days of the Secretary issuing regulations pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, agencies shall take steps, to the extent permitted by law, to exercise any applicable authority to ensure that contracts as described in section 6(d)(i)(C) and (D) of this order, entered into after January 1, 2017, consistent with the effective date of such agency action, comply with the requirements set forth in section 2 of this order.
	(c) Any regulations issued pursuant to this section should, to the extent practicable and consistent with section 7 of this order, incorporate existing definitions, procedures, remedies, and enforcement processes under the Fair Labor Standards Act, 29 U.S.C. 201 et seq.; the Service Contract Act; the Davis-Bacon Act; the Family and Medical Leave Act, 29 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.; the Violence Against Women Act of 1994, 42 U.S.C. 13925 et seq.; and Executive Order 13658 of February 12, 2014, Establishing a Minimum Wage for Contractors.

	Sec. 4. Enforcement. (a) The Secretary shall have the authority for investigating potential violations of and obtaining compliance with this order, including the prohibitions on interference and discrimination in section 2(k) of this order.


	(b) This order creates no rights under the Contract Disputes Act, and disputes regarding whether a contractor has provided employees with paid sick leave prescribed by this order, to the extent permitted by law, shall be disposed of only as provided by the Secretary in regulations issued pursuant to this order.


	Sec. 5. Severability. If any provision of this order, or applying such provision to any person or circumstance, is held to be invalid, the remainder of this order and the application of the provisions of such to any person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.


	Sec. 6. General Provisions. (a) Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:
	(i) the authority granted by law to an executive department, agency, or the head thereof; or
	(ii) the functions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget relating to budgetary, administrative, or legislative proposals.
	(b) This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.
	(c) This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.
	(d) This order shall apply only to a new contract or contract-like instrument, as defined by the Secretary in the regulations issued pursuant to section 3(a) of this order, if:


	(i) (A) it is a procurement contract for services or construction;
	(B) it is a contract or contract-like instrument for services covered by the Service Contract Act;
	(C) it is a contract or contract-like instrument for concessions, including any concessions contract excluded by Department of Labor regulations at 29 CFR 4.133(b); or
	(D) it is a contract or contract-like instrument entered into with the Federal Government in connection with Federal property or lands and related to offering services for Federal employees, their dependents, or the general public; and

	(ii) the wages of employees under such contract or contract-like instrument are governed by the Davis-Bacon Act, the Service Contract Act, or the Fair Labor Standards Act, including employees who qualify for an exemption from its minimum wage and overtime provisions.
	(e) For contracts or contract-like instruments covered by the Service Contract Act or the Davis-Bacon Act, this order shall apply only to contracts or contract-like instruments at the thresholds specified in those statutes. For procurement contracts in which employees' wages are governed by the Fair Labor Standards Act, this order shall apply only to contracts or contract-like instruments that exceed the micro-purchase threshold, as defined in 41 U.S.C. 1902(a), unless expressly made subject to this order pursuant to regulations or actions taken under section 3 of this order.
	(f) This order shall not apply to grants; contracts and agreements with and grants to Indian Tribes under the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (Public Law 93-638), as amended; or any contracts or contract-like instruments expressly excluded by the regulations issued pursuant to section 3(a) of this order.
	(g) Independent agencies are strongly encouraged to comply with the requirements of this order.


	Sec. 7. Effective Date. (a) This order is effective immediately and shall apply to covered contracts where the solicitation for such contract has been issued, or the contract has been awarded outside the solicitation process, on or after:


	(i) January 1, 2017, consistent with the effective date for the action taken by the Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council pursuant to section 3(a) of this order; or
	(ii) January 1, 2017, for contracts where an agency action is taken pursuant to section 3(b) of this order, consistent with the effective date for such action.
	(b) This order shall not apply to contracts or contract-like instruments that are awarded, or entered into pursuant to solicitations issued, on or before the effective date for the relevant action taken pursuant to section 3 of this order.

	BARACK OBAMA
