
	October 18, 2015

	MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE
	                                 THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY
	                                 THE SECRETARY OF COMMERCE
	                                 THE UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE
	                                 THE SECRETARY OF HOMELAND SECURITY
	                                 THE CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
	                                         OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM

	SUBJECT: Delegation of Certain Functions and Authorities under Section 213(b)(1) of the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012

	By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including section 301 of title 3, United States Code, I hereby order as follows:

	I hereby delegate the functions and authorities vested in the President by section 213(b)(1) of the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012 (TRA) to the Secretary of State, in consultation with: the Secretaries of the Treasury and Commerce and the United States Trade Representative; and with the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and other agencies as appropriate.

	The delegation of authorities under section 213(b)(1) of the TRA to the Secretary of the Treasury contained in the Presidential Memorandum of October 9, 2012, entitled "Delegation of Certain Functions and Authorities Under the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012" is hereby rescinded. The other provisions of that Presidential Memorandum remain in effect.

	Any reference herein to provisions of any Act related to the subject of this memorandum shall be deemed to include references to any hereafter-enacted provisions of law that are the same or substantially the same as such provisions.

	The Secretary of State is authorized and directed to publish this memorandum in the Federal Register.

	BARACK OBAMA

	October 18, 2015

	MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE
	                                 THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY
	                                 THE SECRETARY OF COMMERCE
	                                 THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY

	SUBJECT: Preparing for Implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action of July 14, 2015 (JCPOA)

	Today, October 18, 2015, marks Adoption Day under the JCPOA, the day on which the JCPOA comes into effect and all JCPOA participants, including the United States, are to make the necessary arrangements and preparations for implementation of their respective JCPOA commitments.

	Consistent with section 11 of Annex V of the JCPOA, the Secretary of State, acting under previously delegated authority, is taking action with respect to waivers of relevant statutory sanctions, to take effect upon confirmation by the Secretary of State that Iran has implemented the nuclear-related measures specified in sections 15.1-15.11 of Annex V of the JCPOA, as verified by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

	I hereby direct you to take all appropriate additional measures to ensure the prompt and effective implementation of the U.S. commitments set forth in the JCPOA, in accordance with U.S. law. In particular, subject to the requirements of applicable U.S. law, I hereby direct you to take all necessary steps to give effect to the U.S. commitments with respect to sanctions described in section 17 of Annex V of the JCPOA, including preparation for the termination of Executive Orders as specified in section 17.4 and the licensing of activities as set forth in section 17.5, to take effect upon confirmation by the Secretary of State that Iran has implemented the nuclear-related measures specified in sections 15.1-15.11 of Annex V of the JCPOA, as verified by the IAEA.

	In discharging these responsibilities, you are directed to consult with the heads of other executive departments and agencies as may be appropriate.

	The Secretary of State is hereby authorized and directed to publish this memorandum in the Federal Register.

	BARACK OBAMA

	Today marks an important milestone toward preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon and ensuring its nuclear program is exclusively peaceful going forward. On this Adoption Day of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) reached between the P5+1, EU, and Iran, JCPOA participants will make necessary arrangements and preparations for the implementation of their JCPOA commitments. Today, Iran begins to take the steps necessary to implement its JCPOA commitments, including removing thousands of centrifuges and associated infrastructure, reducing its enriched uranium stockpile from approximately 12,000 kilograms to 300 kilograms, and removing the core of the Arak heavy-water reactor and filling it with concrete so that it cannot be used again, among other steps. These next steps will allow us to reach the objectives we set out to achieve over the course of nearly two years of tough, principled diplomacy and will result in cutting off all four pathways Iran could use to develop enough fissile material for a nuclear weapon. I am confident in the extraordinary benefits to our national security and the peace and security of the world that come with the successful implementation of the JCPOA.

	I have directed that the heads of all relevant executive departments and agencies of the United States begin preparations to implement the U.S. commitments in the JCPOA, in accordance with U.S. law, including providing relief from nuclear-related sanctions as detailed in the text of the JCPOA once the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has verified that Iran has completed all of its nuclear steps. We will also be closely monitoring Iran’s adherence to its commitments, working closely with the IAEA and the other JCPOA participants, to ensure Iran fully fulfills each and every one of its commitments.

	I welcome this important step forward, and we, together with our partners, must now focus on the critical work of fully implementing this comprehensive resolution that addresses our concerns over Iran’s nuclear program.
