As part of President Obama’s commitment to protect our Nation’s unique outdoor spaces and ensure that every American has the opportunity to visit and enjoy them, today he will launch an “Every Kid in a Park” initiative that will provide all fourth grade students and their families with free admission to National Parks and other federal lands and waters for a full year. He will also announce the creation of three new National Monuments across the country.
The President will make the announcements near the site of the historic Pullman town in Chicago, a location iconic for its history of labor unrest and civil rights advances, which will be the City’s first National Park Service (NPS) unit.  He also will announce that he will designate Honouliuli National Monument in Hawaii, the site of an internment camp where Japanese American citizens, resident immigrants, and prisoners of war were held captive during World War II, and Browns Canyon National Monument in Colorado, an historic site of extraordinary beauty with world-class recreational opportunities that attract visitors from around the globe. Together, these monuments will help tell the story of significant events in American history and protect unique natural resources for the benefit of all Americans.
Every Kid in a Park
	In the lead up to the 100th birthday of the National Park Service in 2016, the President’s Every Kid in a Park initiative is a call to action to get all children to visit and enjoy America’s unparalleled outdoors. Today, more than 80 percent of American families live in urban areas, and many lack easy access to safe outdoor spaces.  At the same time, kids are spending more time than ever in front of screens instead of outside.  A 2010 Kaiser Family Foundation study found that young people now devote an average of more than seven hours a day to electronic media use, or about 53 hours a week – more than a full time job.
America’s public lands and waters offer space to get outside and get active, and are living classrooms that provide opportunities to build critical skills through hands-on activities.  To inspire the next generation to discover all that America’s public lands and waters have to offer, the Obama Administration will provide all 4th grade students and their families free admission to all National Parks and other federal lands and waters for a full year, starting with the 2015-2016 school year.  The initiative will also:


Make it easy for schools and families to plan trips:  The Administration will distribute information and resources to make it easy for teachers and families to identify nearby public lands and waters and to find programs that support youth outings.

Provide transportation support to schools with the most need: As an integral part of this effort, the National Park Foundation (NPF) – the congressionally chartered foundation of the National Park Service – is expanding and re-launching its Ticket to Ride program as Every Kid in a Park, which will award transportation grants for kids to visit parks, public lands and waters, focusing on schools that have the most need. 

Provide educational materials: The initiative will build on a wide range of educational programs and tools that the federal land management agencies already use.  For example, NPS has re-launched a website with over 1,000 materials developed for K-12 teachers, including science labs, lesson plans, and field trip guides. And a number of federal agencies, including the Bureau of Land Management, Forest Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Education, and NPS participate in Hands on the Land, a national network of field classrooms and agency resources that connects students, teachers, families, and volunteers with public lands and waterways.

To further support this effort, the President’s 2016 Budget includes a total increased investment of $45 million for youth engagement programs throughout the Department of the Interior, with $20 million specifically provided to the National Park Service for youth activities, including bringing 1 million fourth-grade children from low-income areas to national parks. This increase will also fund dedicated youth coordinators to help enrich children and family learning experiences at parks and online.
Pullman National Monument in Illinois:
	This monument will preserve and highlight America’s first planned industrial town, and a site that tells important stories about the social dynamics of the industrial revolution, of American opportunity and discrimination, and of the rise of labor unions and the struggle for civil rights and economic opportunity for African Americans and other minorities. The 203-acre site includes factories and buildings associated with the Pullman Palace Car Company, which was founded in 1867 and employed thousands of workers to construct and provide service on railroad cars. While the Pullman Company employed a mostly white workforce to manufacture railroad passenger cars, it also recruited the first porters, waiters and maids from the population of former slaves to serve on its luxury cars. Though lower-paying, these service jobs held prestige in the African-American community and played a major role in the rise of the African-American middle class and, through an historic labor agreement, the development of the civil rights movement of the 20th Century. The historic labor movement organized by A. Philip Randolph in the 1930s to win rights for these porters, waiters and maids ultimately created the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, the first labor union led by African Americans to receive a charter in the American Federation.
The National Park Foundation today announced that nearly $8 million dollars has already been raised to support the monument, which will be Chicago’s first National Park Service unit and will be managed by the Department of the Interior’s National Park Service.
Browns Canyon National Monument in Colorado:
	This monument will protect a stunning section of Colorado’s upper Arkansas River Valley. Located in Chaffee County near the town of Salida, Colorado, the 21,586-acre monument features rugged granite cliffs, colorful rock outcroppings, and mountain vistas that are home to a diversity of plants and wildlife, including bighorn sheep and golden eagles. Members of Congress, local elected officials, conservation advocates, and community members have worked for more than a decade to protect the area, which hosts world-class recreational opportunities that attract visitors from around the globe for hiking, whitewater rafting, hunting and fishing. In addition to supporting this vibrant outdoor recreation economy, the designation will protect the critical watershed and honor existing water rights and uses, such as grazing and hunting. The monument will be cooperatively managed by the Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Land Management and USDA’s National Forest Service.
Honouliuli National Monument in Hawaii:
	This monument permanently protects a site where Japanese American citizens, resident immigrants, and prisoners of war were held captive during World War II.  Located on the island of Oahu, the monument will help tell the difficult story of the internment camp’s impact on the Japanese American community and the fragility of civil rights during times of conflict. Honouliuli Internment Camp, located in a steep canyon not far from Pearl Harbor, opened in March, 1943 and was the largest and longest-used confinement site for Japanese and European Americans and resident immigrants in Hawaii, eventually holding 400 civilian internees and 4,000 prisoners of war. The camp was largely forgotten until uncovered in 2002, and the President’s designation will ensure its stories are told for generations. The monument will be managed by the Department of the Interior’s National Park Service.
Background on Antiquities Act Designations
	The Antiquities Act was first exercised by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1906 to designate Devils Tower National Monument in Wyoming.  Since then, 16 presidents have used this authority to protect unique natural and historic features in America, such as the Grand Canyon, the Statue of Liberty, and Colorado's Canyons of the Ancients.
With these new designations, President Obama will have used the Antiquities Act to establish or expand 16 national monuments. Altogether, he has protected more than 260 million acres of public lands and waters – more than any other President – as well as preserved sites that help tell the story of significant people or extraordinary events in American history, such as Cèsar E. Chàvez National Monument in California, Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad National Monument in Maryland, and Charles Young Buffalo Soldiers National Monument in Ohio.
CLOSING SESSION:  VISION OF THE FUTURE, BUILDING A GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP AGAINST VIOLENT EXTREMISM
February 19, 2015
	Department of State
AMBASSADOR RICE:  Good evening, everyone.  Eric, thank you for those extraordinarily kind words.  I want you to know as you were singing my praises, Kerry’s over there panning me, questioning every word of your kindness, so I appreciate it all the more.
But I – Eric, I really do want to thank you genuinely for your many years of friendship and partnership.  It’s really been a tremendous honor to serve with you in President Obama’s Administration, and I know I speak for all of your colleagues and friends in the Administration and around the world when I say how grateful we are to you.  Thank you for all you’ve done during your outstanding service as Attorney General to make our country better and our world safer.  We will miss you mightily.  (Applause.)  And John Kerry, I love you too.  (Laughter.)
I’m the clean-up act, so I’ll try to be relatively brief after what I know has been quite a long day, and actually a long couple of days.  John and I were talking before I came on stage, and we wanted to thank you for your extraordinary endurance, your patience in still being here through many hours, but more importantly, for your incredibly valuable contributions to making this summit a success.  And for all of that, we’re very, very grateful.
In this room, we of course have leaders from many faiths and backgrounds.  We’ve come from every region of the world to stand united behind a shared mission: to break the cycle of hatred and despair that drives extremism.  This summit is a firm rebuff to those who propagate the false narrative of a world divided.  Over the past few days, we’ve affirmed a joint vision predicated on the dignity of all people. 
Violent extremism isn’t unique to any one people or place.  It’s sown tragedy from Boston to Chibok, from Paris to Peshawar, from Ottawa to Sydney to Copenhagen.  The bottom line is countering violent extremism is essential to the security of all nations, and no one can meet this challenge alone.  To secure our future against terrorist threats, we have to work together as governments and as peoples.  We have to tackle this challenge from every angle, disrupting terrorist plots, destroying safe havens, and deepening our focus on prevention. 
Yesterday and this morning, President Obama clearly laid out the work we all must do to cut off violent extremism at the knees.  We need to discredit extremist ideologies, address the economic and political grievances that can feed extremism, empower local communities while remaining true to our values.  In our meetings, we’ve begun to build an international agenda for action.  And as we return home, we’ll look to each other to keep pushing our strategy forward on every front.
First, we’ve agreed to work more closely as governments to understand the precise nature of threats at the local and regional level and to better coordinate our responses.  Together we’ll invest in more research and regional assessments that can address the unique challenges of countering violent extremism in different contexts.  We’ll share more information about foreign terrorist fighters and secure our borders against extremists returning from conflict in places like Syria and Iraq.  We’re working together, including at the United Nations, to develop integrated response strategies that draw on the skills we each possess. 
As part of this, President Obama has requested nearly $400 million for the State Department to support a wide range of partnerships to counter terrorism, including projects to address violent extremism.  The United States will launch new initiatives to build the capacity of partners in North Africa and the Sahel to develop strategies that counter violent extremism.  And we’re going to track our collective progress with future meetings to make sure our efforts remain linked up.  And to start, as you heard, President Obama has challenged us all to come to the United Nations General Assembly this fall with concrete steps we can take to move forward together.
Second, as we heard during this summit, effective interventions often begin and grow within local communities.  Government partnerships are critical, but the best solutions are often bottom up, not top down.  So we’ll work more closely with civil society and tap the talents of communities which might otherwise be left on the sidelines.
That includes, critically, women and girls, who are some of the most effective voices in countering violent extremism.  Who is better than a mother to spot unusual behavior in her child and intervene?  Around the world, the United States is supporting projects to train women to recognize the signs of recruitment and radicalization in their families and communities and to devise prevention strategies.   
We’re working to build trust and strengthen cooperation between communities vulnerable to radicalization and the police and security forces charged with protecting them.  In countries where people see law enforcement as a threat, it will take a concerted effort to improve relationships.  Here in the United States, we’re expanding the successful law enforcement training programs we’ve piloted in Boston, Minneapolis, and Los Angeles.  And internationally, we’re working through the Global Counterterrorism Forum to support community-oriented policing in the Balkans, South Asia, the Horn of Africa, and the Sahel. 
Third, we’ll keep working to expand opportunity, particularly for marginalized populations.  If, from an early age, young people can picture a promising future for themselves and see a path to reaching that future, they will be less likely to turn to violence or terrorism.  So, in partnership with the private sector and academia, with charitable groups and civil society, and with each other, we’re going to increase access to education and offer professional training, leadership skills, and mentorship. 
The United States is particularly focused on expanding economic opportunity for young people.  We’re nurturing entrepreneurship and strengthening innovation in emerging markets through our Global Entrepreneurship Summits and the Global Innovation through Science and Technology program.  Our READY Initiative to foster Resilient, Entrepreneurial, and Dynamic Youth teaches young people computer coding, and then places them in online internships with tech companies.  Through the NeXXt Scholars Program, we’re providing young women in Muslim-majority countries with new opportunities in science, technology, engineering, and math. 
We’re investing in the potential of young leaders with initiatives in Africa and Southeast Asia.  And we’re rallying our partners across a broad array of sectors—including heads of the entertainment and technology industries, philanthropists, and policy makers—to expand economic opportunities for vulnerable and marginalized communities. 
Fourth, we’re playing better offense when it comes to undermining the corrosive messages of violent extremists and pushing back with counter narratives of our own.  Violent extremists like ISIL offer nothing but death.  They achieve nothing but the slaughter of innocents.  So we’ll amplify the stories of former recruits who can speak personally about the futility and the barbarity of ISIL’s cause.  We’ll lift up the voices of religious leaders who can speak with authority about how ISIL is in conflict with the peaceful tenets of Islam.  And we’ll encourage students and community leaders to emphasize how ISIL is destroying Muslim communities. 
As the President said earlier today, together with United Arab Emirates, we’re establishing a new digital communications hub to counter terrorist propaganda.  Working with other governments and private sector partners, we’re helping influential community members and religious leaders become more tech-savvy so they can better contest ISIL’s online activities.  Here at the State Department, we’re launching a new Peer-to-Peer Challenge that will encourage university students around the world to develop digital content that stands against extremism.  And yesterday, Secretary Kerry designated the first Special Envoy for Strategic Counterterrorism Communications to drive our government-wide efforts to discredit terrorist messages. 
Finally, we’ll reaffirm our core values and strengthen protections for all our peoples, including religious and ethnic minorities.  We must always take care to protect human rights, including freedom of expression.  We cannot advance our cause by suppressing ideas or curtailing speech.  Offensive speech must be met with more speech.  But there must also always be a line between voicing objectionable ideas and incitement to violence and terrorism. 
As President Obama outlined, people who feel persecuted, targeted by discrimination, or disempowered are more likely to listen when extremists peddle false promises of power, redemption, and belonging.  There’s no one path to violent radicalism.  Extremism can take root wherever someone promotes an ideology of “us” against “them.”  We have to guard against threats that spring from animosity towards any group, whether from anti-Semites, Neo-Nazis, white supremacists, or any hate group.  So we’re going to create dialogues that facilitate understanding and help communities communicate with respect across religious, sectarian, and ethnic lines.  We’ll work for inclusion so that people feel invested in their societies.  And here in the United States, we’ll continue to affirm that our country is home to people of all faiths. 
So let us leave here today with a renewed commitment to building a world unmarred by terrorism and ideologies of violence.  Countering violent extremism is a difficult challenge, but it is not an insurmountable one.  Our timeline for success may be measured in years, if not decades, but we will prevail.  And that’s because, together, we offer what terrorists never can—a positive vision for a more just, more equal, and more peaceful world.   
And at its most basic, that’s what countering violent extremism is all about:  nurturing those better angels of human nature against the demons of hopelessness and hate.  If we succeed in moving towards the ambitious agenda we have set for ourselves at this summit, we will not only strengthen security for all of our peoples today, we will bequeath to our children a safer and brighter future.   Thank you so much for your partnership in this mission.  Thank you for coming together and thank you for the work we will continue to do.  (Applause.)
