
	TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES:

	Section 202(d) of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1622(d)) provides for the automatic termination of a national emergency, unless, within 90 days prior to the anniversary date of its declaration, the President publishes in the Federal Register and transmits to the Congress a notice stating that the emergency is to continue in effect beyond the anniversary date.  In accordance with this provision, I have sent to the Federal Register for publication the enclosed notice stating that the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13396 of February 7, 2006, with respect to the situation in or in relation to Côte d'Ivoire is to continue in effect beyond February 7, 2016.

	The Government of Côte d'Ivoire and its people continue to make significant progress in promotion of democratic, social, and economic development.  We congratulate Côte d'Ivoire on holding a peaceful and credible presidential election, which represents an important milestone on the country's road to full recovery.  The United States also supports the advancement of national reconciliation and impartial justice in Côte d'Ivoire.  The United States is committed to helping Côte d'Ivoire strengthen its democracy and stay on the path of peaceful democratic transition, and we look forward to working with the Government and people of Côte d'Ivoire to ensure continued progress and lasting peace for all Ivoirians.

	While the Government of Côte d'Ivoire and its people continue to make progress towards consolidating democratic gains and peace and prosperity, the situation in or in relation to Côte d'Ivoire continues to pose an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States.  For this reason, I have determined that it is necessary to continue the national emergency and related measures blocking the property of certain persons contributing to the conflict in Côte d'Ivoire.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	NOTICE

	 - - - - - - -

	CONTINUATION OF THE NATIONAL EMERGENCY WITH RESPECT TO THE

	SITUATION IN OR IN RELATION TO CÔTE D'IVOIRE

	 

	On February 7, 2006, by Executive Order 13396, the President declared a national emergency, pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 17011706), to deal with the unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States constituted by the situation in or in relation to Côte d'Ivoire and ordered related measures blocking the property of certain persons contributing to the conflict in Côte d'Ivoire.  The situation in or in relation to Côte d'Ivoire, which has been addressed by the United Nations Security Council in Resolution 1572 of November 15, 2004, and subsequent resolutions, has resulted in the massacre of large numbers of civilians, widespread human rights abuses, significant political violence and unrest, and fatal attacks against international peacekeeping forces.

	The Government of Côte d'Ivoire and its people continue to make significant progress in promotion of democratic, social, and economic development.  We congratulate Côte d'Ivoire on holding a peaceful and credible presidential election, which represents an important milestone on the country's road to full recovery.  The United States also supports the advancement of national reconciliation and impartial justice in Côte d'Ivoire.  The United States is committed to helping Côte d'Ivoire strengthen its democracy and stay on the path of peaceful democratic transition, and we look forward to working with the Government and people of Côte d'Ivoire to ensure continued progress and lasting peace for all Ivoirians.

	While the Government of Côte d'Ivoire and its people continue to make progress towards consolidating democratic gains and peace and prosperity, the situation in or in relation to Côte d'Ivoire continues to pose an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States.  For this reason, the national emergency declared on February 7, 2006, and the measures adopted on that date to deal with that emergency, must continue in effect beyond February 7, 2016.  Therefore, in accordance with section 202(d) of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1622(d)), I am continuing for 1 year the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13396.

	This notice shall be published in the Federal Register and transmitted to the Congress.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	The President yesterday declared a major disaster exists in the State of Washington and ordered federal aid to supplement state, tribal, and local recovery efforts in the area affected by a severe winter storm, straight-line winds, flooding, landslides, mudslides, and a tornado during the period of December 1-14, 2015.

	Federal funding also is available to state, tribal, and eligible local governments and certain private nonprofit organizations on a cost-sharing basis for emergency work and the repair or replacement of facilities damaged by the severe winter storm, straight-line winds, flooding, landslides, mudslides, and a tornado in the counties of Clallam, Clark, Cowlitz, Grays Harbor, Jefferson, Lewis, Mason, Pacific, Skamania, and Wahkiakum.

	Federal funding is also available on a cost-sharing basis for hazard mitigation measures statewide. 

	W. Craig Fugate, Administrator, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Department of Homeland Security, named Thomas J. Dargan as the Federal Coordinating Officer for federal recovery operations in the affected area. 

	FEMA said additional designations may be made at a later date if requested by the state and warranted by the results of further damage assessments.

	Islamic Society of Baltimore
	Baltimore, Maryland

	11:52 A.M. EST

	MR. EARNEST:  So I had the opportunity to sit in on the first part of the President’s roundtable discussion with some of the Muslim leaders that the President was meeting with prior to his speech today.  

	It was an opportunity for him, as you saw, to visit with Muslims from all walks of life, with a variety of experiences.  But all of them do reflect the diversity of our country, certainly the racial and ethnic diversity of our country.  But they all have their own story to tell about the way that they contribute to and enrich the communities in which they live.  So the President will certainly enjoy the opportunity to hear from them.  That discussion is ongoing, but I wanted to step out and have a chance to speak with all of you before the President’s speech.

	So with that, I’m happy to take your questions.

	Q    Can I ask about the Zika virus?

	MR. EARNEST:  Sure.

	Q    The WHO has said it’s concerned about a potential new way it’s transmitted.  And I’m wondering whether this changes anything for the United States and its response and its strategy.  The Dallas case I’m referring to.

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, as you’ve heard me say over the last couple of weeks that we’ve been talking about this, there is still a lot of scientific work that needs to be done to understand a lot about this disease, including its connection to a particular birth defect, but also how it’s transmitted.  At this point, our understanding of exactly the impact of the disease, though, has not changed.  The symptoms that are associated with this virus are relatively mild, and they last only a week or so.  And they only appear in about one in five people who contracts the virus.

	The particular concern that we have is about the potential link to a birth defect.  In the case that you mention, in Texas, that does not appear to be an issue.  But we’re certainly going to rely on the collection of data and the analysis of our scientific experts to guide the American public and provide them with the information that they need to protect themselves.

	Q    Should Americans be more worried about potentially contracting it, particularly women who may be considering having a child, given that there’s this potential new route of transmission?

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, as we have more information about what people can do to protect themselves, then we’re certainly going to share that information.  But as you point out, it is important for people to understand exactly what those risks are.  If you’re a man, the risks are relatively minimal.  The risks are associated with contracting a virus that has relatively mild symptoms.  But we do want to communicate with the American public.  And as we have more information to share about the steps that they can take to keep them and their families safe, then we’ll share that information.

	Q    Josh, I wanted to ask about Libya.  The Secretary of State seems to have indicated that the President has ruled out any participation in a U.N. ground force in Libya should the national unity government be established.  I was wondering, has the President actually ruled that out?  I understand they haven't received any recommendation as yet.

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President did convene his National Security Council a week or two ago to talk about our counter-ISIL efforts.  This is something that he does every couple of weeks.  And the focus of those discussions is typically on the ongoing efforts to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL in Iraq and in Syria.  But we’re mindful of the desire on the part of ISIL’s leaders to try to establish a foothold in other countries that are experiencing severe political chaos like they are in Libya.  

	So there are a number of things that we’ve done to try to counter that.  The first is, we have been working hard to support the U.N.-led effort to bring about the kind of political transition inside of Libya that will allow a national unity government to be established and to stabilize the political situation in that country.  I think that’s our top priority.  But that’s a difficult challenge and one that’s been ongoing for some time.

	The President has not hesitated to order the use of military force, even in Libya, to protect the American people and to counter ISIL.  In fact, back in November, the United States military carried out an airstrike where the leading ISIL figure in Libya was taken off the battlefield.  

	As we move forward, the President will continue to be updated on the potential risks associated with the spread of ISIL into Libya, and he’s going to continue to get updates from his team about what they recommend is the best way to counter that threat.  I don’t have any new announcements to make about decisions the President has or hasn’t made.  But I think the track record of just the last couple of months I think gives you the opportunity to assess that the President has demonstrated a willingness to take decisive action to protect the American people from ISIL, even in Libya.

	Q    Do you think if the national unity government is stood up, which it looks like it will be, is it possible for them to survive without foreign military assistance on the ground and boots on the ground?

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the first thing that we’ll do is, as the national unity government is put together, we certainly are going to be very respectful of the sovereignty of that government.  So that will be the first thing.  I think that the national unity government, to the extent that they request the assistance and support of the United States and other Western governments, they can count on it.  We understand that the stability and even success of the national unity government in Libya has national security consequences for the United States and our allies, because we know that ISIL is looking to capitalize on countries that governed by unstable governments.  And so the more that we can bolster the capacity of the national unity government in Libya to govern that country, the better off we're going to be.

	I’m confident that part of that support will include cooperation on a range of national security issues.  What form that kind of support or assistance will take at this point is too early to say.  But if there is a need -- again, as we demonstrated back in November, if there is a need for the United States to take unilateral action to protect the American people, the President won’t hesitate to do that.

	Q    Josh, can I ask you about the visit here today?  There has been criticism in a variety of outlets about this particular mosque and its potential ties to extremist groups.  Given that focus, does the White House still feel good about the vetting process of selecting this particular mosque to visit?  Are there any questions about how this particular site was chosen?

	MR. EARNEST:  I know that there has been some criticism.  But I think you all have had the chance to spend a little time here, just in the last few minutes.  I think you can see that there is -- that this is an institution that is making a valuable contribution to its community.  There is a school here that's educating children.  There are medical services provided in this facility.  And this is a faith community that regularly speaks out against extremism.  

	And what the President is here to do today is to affirm the rightful role that the people who worship at this mosque have in our country, and that our commitment to protecting their religious liberty is quite firm.

	And I think the President can make a pretty powerful statement to that effect just by showing up.  But he also brought along a speech where he intends to communicate that not just to those who are in the room, but to those who will be watching his remarks around the country and even around the world.

	Q    But you don't have concerns that the message he’s trying to deliver gets overshadowed by this pulled focus of these criticisms and concerns that are being raised?

	MR. EARNEST:  No.  There is no one who has been covering politics over the last year who is surprised to see that the President’s visit to a mosque is going to be criticized by the President’s political opponents.  We're not concerned about that at all.  

	If anything, if it elevates the President’s visit and elevates the President’s message of protecting religious liberty and affirming the rightful and meaningful contribution of Muslim Americans to our country, then our opponents should be keep it up.

	Q    Should he have come earlier considering rising levels of anti-Muslim rhetoric in this country and rising anti-Muslim hate crimes?

	MR. EARNEST:  I think the timing of the President’s visit is good.  And it does serve as an opportunity for him to send a meaningful message to both Muslims and non-Muslims alike.

	Q    Can you describe the process by which the roundtable participants were chosen?

	MR. EARNEST:  What we sought to do is to bring together a diversity of voices, people with a variety of perspectives, different racial and ethnic backgrounds, and even people who practice their Muslim faith in different ways.  All of them know what they have in common is they’ve all made an important contribution to the community in which they live, and that makes them important representatives of how much Muslim Americans across the country have to contribute to the communities in which they live.

	Q    Do you know if any of the people in the roundtable were victims of bias or discrimination or any behavior of that sort?

	MR. EARNEST:  I think I will leave it to them to tell their stories.  And you obviously have all of their names, and we can help connect you with them directly.  But if those individuals want to tell their stories, they can do that.  Why don't I just say in general that part of the discussion that the President had earlier today did talk about some of the stereotypes and bias that many Muslim Americans are subjected to.

	Q    The President is expected to talk a little bit about national security here, as well, as I understand it.  Is that right?

	MR. EARNEST:  Yes, the President certainly will talk about national security while he’s here as well.

	Q    Does the fact that he’s doing that not encourage this bias?  I mean, what does national security got to do with these people?  Why is every time somebody opens their mouth about Muslims you have to have some kind of (inaudible) about national security?

	MR. EARNEST:  I think that’s a good question.  And I think, Andrew, what the President is hoping to reinforce is a message that you’ve heard from us before, which is that we know that there are extremist organizations like ISIL that are seeking to infiltrate Muslim communities both in the United States and around the world.  And the question is, as somebody who has a responsibility to protect the American people, the question the President asks is what is going to be our most effective strategy for countering that.  And the strategy that is proposed by some is to automatically assume that every Muslim in America is a potential terrorist.  That actually is going to undermine our strategy to keep the American people safe.  

	The President believes, rather, that we should enter into a partnership with the Muslim community.  After all, it is leaders in Muslim communities who, as much as anyone else, are interested in countering the efforts of terrorist organizations like ISIL from radicalizing vulnerable members of their community.  So why not work with them in that effort both to safeguard their communities but also to safeguard the country.

	We'll do a couple more.  Go ahead.

	Q    Any thought of inviting Republicans today?  

	MR. EARNEST:  I'm not sure exactly how the list -- I think the list was put together in terms of members of Congress who were invited.  We invited the local congressional delegation as well as two Muslim members of Congress.  I'm not aware of any interest that was expressed by Republicans to attend the event, but I'm confident that they were not intentionally excluded.  

	Q    Yesterday you called Mitch McConnell a committed supporter of TPP.  He went up on the Hill and said that there were a number of flaws with the bill and he wasn’t sure if he could support it.  What’s the kind of disjoint there?

	MR. EARNEST:  I think I was -- I tried to be careful in my comments, and if -- I needed to be more precise than I should have been.  The point that I have made -- and I know I've said this a number of times -- we know that people like Leader McConnell and Speaker Ryan and many other Republicans in the United States Congress are supportive of agreements like the Trans-Pacific Partnership that would, for example, cut taxes on 18,000 American goods that are imposed by other countries.  

	I'll leave it to Leader McConnell to render his judgment on this specific agreement.  We certainly are going to advocate to him and to Democrats and Republicans alike that this is a good agreement that is clearly in the best interest of our country and our economy.  But I'll let him say whether or not he supports it.  I think there will be a lot in here -- based on his public comments in the past, I think there’s a lot in this agreement for him to like.

	Q    And then, Ukraine’s economy minister resigned today.  He said he was under pressure to appoint people who would have blocked some anti-corruption practices that the U.S. has backed.  Obviously it’s the latest sign of instability in the Poroshenko government.  Do you guys have a response to that?

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, there’s no denying that the Ukrainian government is under intense pressure because of Russia’s destabilizing activities in their country.  And that's why we have pushed hard for the implementation of the Minsk agreement to try to resolve that instability.  

	But what’s also true is that we have repeatedly encouraged the Ukrainian government to consider and move forward in implementing needed reforms in their government and in their economy.  Much of the assistance that we have provided has been contingent on the successful implementation of some of those reforms.  We're pleased with the kind of progress that the Ukrainian government has made in implementing those reforms.  But there’s more work to do, and they can count on the support and partnership of the United States as they implement those reforms.

	Q    A quick one on the Brexit, just because it's so hot right now in Britain.  What is the White House position on how it would affect the U.S. relationship with Britain if the UK leaves the EU?  And what would it mean for the economy and NATO?

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, ultimately, this will be a decision for the British people to decide -- or a decision for the British people to make.  And I know that Prime Minister Cameron has made some commitments to the British people about national consideration of this question.  The U.S. position has long been that we benefit as a country and as a broader NATO alliance from a strong UK being a member of a strong EU.  And all of that is something that we want to encourage.  

	But in terms of the kinds of decisions that need to be made by the British people about the best kind of relationship, that's a decision that they should make.  And it sounds like they’ll have an opportunity to do so relatively soon.  

	Q    Valerie Jarrett was in the roundtable.  Was there anyone else of note from the White House who was in the roundtable?

	MR. EARNEST:  There’s some other White House staffers, including Melissa Rogers, who is the Director of Faith Outreach at the White House.

	Why don't we let you guys go and get a seat for the President’s remarks.  Nice to see you guys.  

	END 
	12:07 P.M. EST

	Today, the White House Rural Council convened to discuss a number of challenges facing rural America, including financial stress, mental health, and the opioid epidemic which has hit rural counties especially hard. The President dropped by the meeting to thank the Council for their work and to discuss how to better target federal resources to help these communities.

	A photo from today’s meeting can be found HERE.

	The President established the White House Rural Council by Executive Order in June 2011 to address challenges in rural America and to build on the Administration’s rural economic strategy. Chaired by Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack, the Council aims to streamline and improve the effectiveness of federal programs serving rural America, engage stakeholders on issues important to rural communities, and to coordinate private sector partnerships to further job creation and economic development opportunities in rural areas.

	The President recently charged the Council to lead an interagency effort focused on addressing some of the challenges affecting rural America, including heightened financial stress, increased substance abuse and overdose, and increased suicide rates. The President thanked Secretary Vilsack and Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell, and others across the federal government for their work in this effort and highlighted the Administration’s $1.1 billion budget proposal announced yesterday to help ensure that all Americans who want treatment can get the care they need. The President’s FY 2017 Budget takes a two-pronged approach to address this epidemic. First, it includes $1 billion in new mandatory funding over two years to expand access to treatment for prescription drug abuse and heroin use. This funding will boost efforts to help individuals with an opioid use disorder seek treatment, successfully complete treatment, and sustain recovery. This funding includes: 


		$920 million to support cooperative agreements with States to expand access to medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorders. States will receive funds based on the severity of the epidemic and on the strength of their strategy to respond to it.  States can use these funds to expand treatment capacity and make services more affordable. 

		$50 million in National Health Service Corps funding to expand access to substance use treatment providers.  This funding will help support approximately 700 providers able to provide substance use disorder treatment services, including medication-assisted treatment, in areas across the country most in need of behavioral health providers.

		$30 million to evaluate the effectiveness of treatment programs employing medication-assisted treatment under real-world conditions and help identify opportunities to improve treatment for patients with opioid use disorders.


	Second, the President’s Budget includes approximately $500 million -- an increase of more than $90 million -- to continue and build on current efforts across the Departments of Justice (DOJ) and Health and Human Services (HHS) to expand state-level prescription drug overdose prevention strategies, increase the availability of medication-assisted treatment programs, improve access to the overdose-reversal drug naloxone, and support targeted enforcement activities. A portion of this funding is directed specifically to rural areas, where rates of overdose and opioid use are particularly high. To help further expand access to treatment, the Budget includes an HHS pilot project for nurse practitioners and physician assistants to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder treatment, where allowed by state law.

	###

	The Vice President today met with Iraq's Speaker of the Council of Representatives, Salim al-Jabouri. The Vice President reaffirmed the unwavering commitment of the United States to Iraq's long-term success and commended the bravery and tenacity of the Iraqi Security Forces and tribal fighters in their liberation of Ramadi.  Both leaders acknowledged the urgency of sustained international assistance to address Iraq's significant humanitarian and economic needs, including stabilization and reconstruction efforts.  Both leaders expressed their enduring commitment to degrade and destroy ISIL and to bolster a democratic, united, and federal Iraq to ensure prosperity for all Iraqi citizens.  

	Baltimore, Maryland

	1:04 P.M. EST

	THE PRESIDENT:  Well, good afternoon.  And, Sabah, thank you for the wonderful introduction and for your example -- your devotion to your faith and your education, and your service to others.  You’re an inspiration.  You’re going to be a fantastic doctor.  And I suspect, Sabah, your parents are here because they wanted to see you so -- where are Sabah’s parents?  There you go. (Applause.)  Good job, Mom.  She did great, didn’t she?  She was terrific. 

	To everyone here at the Islamic Society of Baltimore, thank you for welcoming me here today.  I want to thank Muslim Americans leaders from across this city and this state, and some who traveled even from out of state to be here.  I want to recognize Congressman John Sarbanes, who is here.  (Applause.)  As well as two other great leaders in Congress -- and proud Muslim Americans -- Congressman Keith Ellison from the great state of Minnesota -- (applause) -- and Congressman Andre Carson from the great state of Indiana.  (Applause.) 

	This mosque, like so many in our country, is an all-American story.  You’ve been part of this city for nearly half a century. You serve thousands of families -- some who’ve lived here for decades as well as immigrants from many countries who’ve worked to become proud American citizens.

	Now, a lot of Americans have never visited a mosque.  To the folks watching this today who haven’t -- think of your own church, or synagogue, or temple, and a mosque like this will be very familiar.  This is where families come to worship and express their love for God and each other.  There’s a school where teachers open young minds.  Kids play baseball and football and basketball -- boys and girls -- I hear they’re pretty good.  (Laughter.)  Cub Scouts, Girl Scouts meet, recite the Pledge of Allegiance here. 

	With interfaith dialogue, you build bridges of understanding with other faith communities -- Christians and Jews.  There’s a health clinic that serves the needy, regardless of their faith.  And members of this community are out in the broader community, working for social justice and urban development.  As voters, you come here to meet candidates.  As one of your members said, “just look at the way we live...we are true Americans.”

	So the first thing I want to say is two words that Muslim Americans don’t hear often enough -- and that is, thank you.  Thank you for serving your community.  Thank you for lifting up the lives of your neighbors, and for helping keep us strong and united as one American family.  We are grateful for that.  (Applause.) 

	Now, this brings me to the other reason I wanted to come here today.  I know that in Muslim communities across our country, this is a time of concern and, frankly, a time of some fear.  Like all Americans, you’re worried about the threat of terrorism.  But on top of that, as Muslim Americans, you also have another concern -- and that is your entire community so often is targeted or blamed for the violent acts of the very few. 

	The Muslim American community remains relatively small --several million people in this country.  And as a result, most Americans don’t necessarily know -- or at least don't know that they know -- a Muslim personally.  And as a result, many only hear about Muslims and Islam from the news after an act of terrorism, or in distorted media portrayals in TV or film, all of which gives this hugely distorted impression. 

	And since 9/11, but more recently, since the attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, you’ve seen too often people conflating the horrific acts of terrorism with the beliefs of an entire faith.  And of course, recently, we’ve heard inexcusable political rhetoric against Muslim Americans that has no place in our country.

	No surprise, then, that threats and harassment of Muslim Americans have surged.  Here at this mosque, twice last year, threats were made against your children.  Around the country, women wearing the hijab -- just like Sabah -- have been targeted. We’ve seen children bullied.  We’ve seen mosques vandalized.  Sikh Americans and others who are perceived to be Muslims have been targeted, as well. 

	I just had a chance to meet with some extraordinary Muslim Americans from across the country who are doing all sorts of work.  Some of them are doctors; some of them are community leaders; religious leaders.  All of them were doing extraordinary work not just in the Muslim community but in the American community.  And they’re proud of their work in business and education, and on behalf of social justice and the environment and education.  I should point out they were all much younger than me -- (laughter) -- which is happening more frequently these days.  And you couldn’t help but be inspired, hearing about the extraordinary work that they’re doing.  But you also could not help but be heartbroken to hear their worries and their anxieties. 

	Some of them are parents, and they talked about how their children were asking, are we going to be forced out of the country, or, are we going to be rounded up?  Why do people treat us like that?  Conversations that you shouldn’t have to have with children -- not in this country.  Not at this moment. 

	And that’s an anxiety echoed in letters I get from Muslim Americans around the country.  I’ve had people write to me and say, I feel like I’m a second-class citizen.  I’ve had mothers write and say, “my heart cries every night,” thinking about how her daughter might be treated at school.  A girl from Ohio, 13 years old, told me, “I’m scared.”  A girl from Texas signed her letter “a confused 14-year-old trying to find her place in the world.”

	These are children just like mine.  And the notion that they would be filled with doubt and questioning their places in this great country of ours at a time when they’ve got enough to worry about -- it’s hard being a teenager already -- that’s not who we are. 

	We’re one American family.  And when any part of our family starts to feel separate or second-class or targeted, it tears at the very fabric of our nation.  (Applause.) 

	It’s a challenge to our values -- and that means we have much work to do.  We’ve got to tackle this head on.  We have to be honest and clear about it.   And we have to speak out.  This is a moment when, as Americans, we have to truly listen to each other and learn from each other.  And I believe it has to begin with a common understanding of some basic facts.  And I express these facts, although they’d be obvious to many of the people in this place, because, unfortunately, it’s not facts that are communicated on a regular basis through our media.

	So let’s start with this fact:  For more than a thousand years, people have been drawn to Islam’s message of peace.  And the very word itself, Islam, comes from salam -- peace.  The standard greeting is as-salamu alaykum -- peace be upon you.  And like so many faiths, Islam is rooted in a commitment to compassion and mercy and justice and charity.  Whoever wants to enter paradise, the Prophet Muhammad taught, “let him treat people the way he would love to be treated.”  (Applause.)  For Christians like myself, I’m assuming that sounds familiar.  (Laughter.)

	The world’s 1.6 billion Muslims are as diverse as humanity itself.  They are Arabs and Africans.  They're from Latin America to Southeast Asia; Brazilians, Nigerians, Bangladeshis, Indonesians.  They are white and brown and black.  There’s a large African American Muslim community.  That diversity is represented here today.  A 14-year-old boy in Texas who’s Muslim spoke for many when he wrote to me and said, “We just want to live in peace.”

	Here’s another fact:  Islam has always been part of America. Starting in colonial times, many of the slaves brought here from Africa were Muslim.  And even in their bondage, some kept their faith alive.  A few even won their freedom and became known to many Americans.  And when enshrining the freedom of religion in our Constitution and our Bill of Rights, our Founders meant what they said when they said it applied to all religions.

	Back then, Muslims were often called Mahometans.  And Thomas Jefferson explained that the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom he wrote was designed to protect all faiths -- and I’m quoting Thomas Jefferson now -- “the Jew and the Gentile, the Christian and the Mahometan.”  (Applause.)

	Jefferson and John Adams had their own copies of the Koran. Benjamin Franklin wrote that “even if the Mufti of Constantinople were to send a missionary to preach to us, he would find a pulpit at his service.”  (Applause.)  So this is not a new thing.

	Generations of Muslim Americans helped to build our nation. They were part of the flow of immigrants who became farmers and merchants.  They built America’s first mosque, surprisingly enough, in North Dakota.  (Laughter.)  America’s oldest surviving mosque is in Iowa.  The first Islamic center in New York City was built in the 1890s.  Muslim Americans worked on Henry Ford’s assembly line, cranking out cars.  A Muslim American designed the skyscrapers of Chicago. 

	In 1957, when dedicating the Islamic center in Washington, D.C., President Eisenhower said, “I should like to assure you, my Islamic friends, that under the American Constitution … and in American hearts…this place of worship, is just as welcome…as any other religion.”  (Applause.)

	And perhaps the most pertinent fact, Muslim Americans enrich our lives today in every way.  They’re our neighbors, the teachers who inspire our children, the doctors who trust us with our health -- future doctors like Sabah.  They’re scientists who win Nobel Prizes, young entrepreneurs who are creating new technologies that we use all the time.  They’re the sports heroes we cheer for -— like Muhammad Ali and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Hakeem Olajuwon.  And by the way, when Team USA marches into the next Olympics, one of the Americans waving the red, white and blue -- (applause) -- will a fencing champion, wearing her hijab, Ibtihaj Muhammad, who is here today.  Stand up.  (Applause.)  I told her to bring home the gold.  (Laughter.)  Not to put any pressure on you.  (Laughter.)

	Muslim Americans keep us safe.  They’re our police and our firefighters.  They're in homeland security, in our intelligence community.  They serve honorably in our armed forces -- meaning they fight and bleed and die for our freedom.  Some rest in Arlington National Cemetery.  (Applause.) 

	So Muslim Americans are some of the most resilient and patriotic Americans you’ll ever meet.  We’re honored to have some of our proud Muslim American servicemembers here today.  Please stand if you're here, so we can thank you for your service.  (Applause.)

	So part of the reason I want to lay out these facts is because, in the discussions that I was having with these incredibly accomplished young people, they were pointing that so often they felt invisible.  And part of what we have to do is to lift up the contributions of the Muslim American community not when there’s a problem, but all the time. 

	Our television shows should have some Muslim characters that are unrelated to national security -- (applause) -- because -- it’s not that hard to do.  There was a time when there were no black people on television.  And you can tell good stories while still representing the reality of our communities.

	     Now, we do have another fact that we have to acknowledge.  Even as the overwhelming majority -- and I repeat, the overwhelming majority -- of the world’s Muslims embrace Islam as a source of peace, it is undeniable that a small fraction of Muslims propagate a perverted interpretation of Islam.  This is the truth. 

	Groups like al Qaeda and ISIL, they’re not the first extremists in history to misuse God’s name.  We’ve seen it before, across faiths.  But right now, there is a organized extremist element that draws selectively from Islamic texts, twists them in an attempt to justify their killing and their terror.  They combine it with false claims that America and the West are at war with Islam.  And this warped thinking that has found adherents around the world -- including, as we saw, tragically, in Boston and Chattanooga and San Bernardino -- is real.  It’s there.  And it creates tensions and pressure that disproportionately burden the overwhelming majority of law-abiding Muslim citizens.    

	And the question then is, how do we move forward together?  How do we keep our country strong and united?  How do we defend ourselves against organizations that are bent on killing innocents?  And it can’t be the work of any one faith alone.  It can’t be just a burden on the Muslim community -- although the Muslim community has to play a role.  We all have responsibilities.  So with the time I have left, I just want to suggest a few principles that I believe can guide us.

	First, at a time when others are trying to divide us along lines of religion or sect, we have to reaffirm that most fundamental of truths:  We are all God’s children.  We’re all born equal, with inherent dignity. 

	And so often, we focus on our outward differences and we forget how much we share.  Christians, Jews, Muslims -- we’re all, under our faiths, descendants of Abraham.  So mere tolerance of different religions is not enough.  Our faiths summon us to embrace our common humanity.  “O mankind,” the Koran teaches, we have “made you peoples and tribes that you may know one another.” (Applause.)  So all of us have the task of expressing our religious faith in a way that seeks to build bridges rather than to divide.

	Second, as Americans, we have to stay true to our core values, and that includes freedom of religion for all faiths.  I already mentioned our Founders, like Jefferson, knew that religious liberty is essential not only to protect religion but because religion helps strengthen our nation -- if it is free, if it is not an extension of the state.  Part of what’s happened in the Middle East and North Africa and other places where we see sectarian violence is religion being a tool for another agenda -- for power, for control.  Freedom of religion helps prevent that, both ways -- protects religious faiths, protects the state from  -- or those who want to take over the state from using religious animosity as a tool for their own ends. 

	That doesn’t mean that those of us with religious faith should not be involved.  We have to be active citizenry.  But we have to respect the fact that we have freedom of religion. 

	Remember, many preachers and pastors fought to abolish the evil of slavery.  People of faith advocated to improve conditions for workers and ban child labor.  Dr. King was joined by people of many faiths, challenging us to live up to our ideals.  And that civil activism, that civic participation that’s the essence of our democracy, it is enhanced by freedom of religion. 

	Now, we have to acknowledge that there have been times where we have fallen short of our ideals.  By the way, Thomas Jefferson’s opponents tried to stir things up by suggesting he was a Muslim -- so I was not the first -- (applause.)  No, it’s true, it’s true.  Look it up.  (Laughter.)  I’m in good company. (Laughter.) 

	But it hasn’t just been attacks of that sort that have been used.  Mormon communities have been attacked throughout our history.  Catholics, including, most prominently, JFK -- John F. Kennedy -- when he ran for President, was accused of being disloyal.  There was a suggestion that he would be taking orders from the Pope as opposed to upholding his constitutional duties. Anti-Semitism in this country has a sad and long history, and Jews were exclude routinely from colleges and professions and from public office.

	And so if we’re serious about freedom of religion -- and I’m speaking now to my fellow Christians who remain the majority in this country -- we have to understand an attack on one faith is an attack on all our faiths.  (Applause.)  And when any religious group is targeted, we all have a responsibility to speak up.  And we have to reject a politics that seeks to manipulate prejudice or bias, and targets people because of religion.

	We’ve got to make sure that hate crimes are punished, and that the civil rights of all Americans are upheld.  (Applause.)  And just as faith leaders, including Muslims, must speak out when Christians are persecuted around the world -- (applause) -- or when anti-Semitism is on the rise -- because the fact is, is that there are Christians who are targeted now in the Middle East, despite having been there for centuries, and there are Jews who’ve lived in places like France for centuries who now feel obliged to leave because they feel themselves under assault --sometimes by Muslims.  We have to be consistent in condemning hateful rhetoric and violence against everyone.  (Applause.)  And that includes against Muslims here in the United States of America.  (Applause.) 

	So none of us can be silent.  We can’t be bystanders to bigotry.  And together, we’ve got to show that America truly protects all faiths.  

	Which brings me to my next point:  As we protect our country from terrorism, we should not reinforce the ideas and the rhetoric of the terrorists themselves.  I often hear it said that we need moral clarity in this fight.  And the suggestion is somehow that if I would simply say, these are all Islamic terrorists, then we would actually have solved the problem by now, apparently.  (Laughter.)  Well, I agree, we actually do need moral clarity.  Let’s have some moral clarity.  (Applause.) 

	Groups like ISIL are desperate for legitimacy.  They try to portray themselves as religious leaders and holy warriors who speak for Islam.  I refuse to give them legitimacy.  We must never give them that legitimacy.  (Applause.)  They’re not defending Islam.  They’re not defending Muslims.  The vast majority of the people they kill are innocent Muslim men, women and children.  (Applause.) 

	And, by the way, the notion that America is at war with Islam ignores the fact that the world’s religions are a part of who we are.  We can’t be at war with any other religion because the world’s religions are a part of the very fabric of the United States, our national character.  (Applause.) 

	So the best way for us to fight terrorism is to deny these organizations legitimacy and to show that here in the United States of America, we do not suppress Islam; we celebrate and lift up the success of Muslim Americans.  That’s how we show the lie that they’re trying to propagate.  (Applause.)  We shouldn’t play into terrorist propaganda.  And we can’t suggest that Islam itself is at the root of the problem.  That betrays our values.  It alienates Muslim Americans.  It’s hurtful to those kids who are trying to go to school and are members of the Boy Scouts, and are thinking about joining our military. 

	That kind of mindset helps our enemies.  It helps our enemies recruit.  It makes us all less safe.  So let’s be clear about that. 

	Now, finally, just as all Americans have a responsibility to reject discrimination -- I’ve said this before -- Muslims around the world have a responsibility to reject extremist ideologies that are trying to penetrate within Muslim communities. 

	Here at this mosque, and across our country and around the world, Muslim leaders are roundly and repeatedly and consistently condemning terrorism.  And around the globe, Muslims who’ve dared to speak out have often been targeted and even killed.  So those voices are there; we just have to amplify them more.  (Applause.) 

	And it was interesting, in the discussion I had before I came out, some people said, why is there always a burden on us? When a young man in Charleston shoots African Americans in a church, there’s not an expectation that every white person in America suddenly is explaining that they’re not racist.  They can Everybody is assumed to be horrified by that act.  And I recognize that sometimes that doesn't feel fair. 

	But part of the answer is to make sure that the Muslim community in all of its variety, in all the good works that it’s doing, in all the talent that's on display, that it’s out there visible on a consistent basis -- not just at a certain moment.  (Applause.) 

	But what is also true is, is that there is a battle of hearts and minds that takes place -- that is taking place right now, and American Muslims are better positioned than anybody to show that it is possible to be faithful to Islam and to be part of a pluralistic society, and to be on the cutting-edge of science, and to believe in democracy.  (Applause.)

	And so I would urge all of you not to see this as a burden, but as a great opportunity and a great privilege to show who you are.  To use a little Christian expression -- let your light shine.  Because when you do you’ll make clear that this is not a clash of civilizations between the West and Islam.  This is a struggle between the peace-loving, overwhelming majority of Muslims around the world and a radical, tiny minority.  And ultimately, I’m confident that the overwhelming majority will win that battle.  (Applause.)  Muslims will decide the future of your faith.  And I’m confident in the direction that it will go. 

	But across the Islamic world, influential voices should consistently speak out with an affirmative vision of their faith. And it’s happening.  These are the voices of Muslim clerics who teach that Islam prohibits terrorism, for the Koran says whoever kills an innocent, it is as if he has killed all mankind.  (Applause.)  These are the voices of Muslim scholars, some of whom join us today, who know Islam has a tradition of respect for other faiths; and Muslim teachers who point out that the first word revealed in the Koran -- igra -- means “read” -- to seek knowledge, to question assumptions.  (Applause.)

	Muslim political leaders have to push back on the lie that the West oppresses Muslims, and against conspiracy theories that says America is the cause of every ill in the Middle East.  Now, that doesn't mean that Muslim Americans aren’t free to criticize American -- U.S. foreign policy.  That's part of being an American.  I promise you, as the President of the United States, I’m mindful that that is a healthy tradition that is alive and well in America.  (Laughter.)  But like leaders everywhere, these leaders have been offering, and need to continue to offer, a positive vision for progress, and that includes political and economic progress.

	And we have to acknowledge that much of the violence in places like the Middle East is now turning into fights between sects -- Shia, Sunni and others -- where differences are often exploited to serve political agendas, as I said earlier.  And this bloodshed is destroying Muslim families and communities, and there has to be global pressure to have the vision and the courage to end this kind of thinking and this approach to organizing political power. 

	It’s not historically unique.  It’s happened in every part of the world -- from Northern Ireland to Africa, to Asia, to right here in the United States -- in the past.  But it is something that we have to fight against.

	And we know it’s possible.  Across the history of Islam, different sects traditionally have lived and thrived together peacefully.  And in many parts of the world they do today, including here in the United States. 

	Like people of all religions, Muslims living their faith in a modern, pluralistic world are called upon to uphold human rights, to make sure that everyone has opportunity.  That includes the aspirations of women and youth and all people.  If we expect our own dignity to be respected, so must we respect the dignity of others.  (Applause.)

	So let me conclude by saying that as Muslim communities stand up for the future that you believe in, that you exhibit in your daily lives, as you teach your children, America will be your partner.  We will -- I will -- do everything I can to lift up the multiplicity of Muslim voices that promote pluralism and peace.  (Applause.)  We will continue to reach out to young Muslims around the world, empowering them with science and technology and entrepreneurship, so they can pursue their God-given potential, and help build up their communities and provide opportunity.  It’s why we will continue to partner with Muslim American communities -- not just to help you protect against extremist threats, but to expand health care and education and opportunity -- (applause) -- because that’s the best way to build strong, resilient communities.

	Our values must guide us in this work.  Engagement with Muslim American communities must never be a cover for surveillance.  (Applause.)  We can’t give in to profiling entire groups of people.  There’s no one single profile of terrorists.  We can’t securitize our entire relationship with Muslim Americans.  We can’t deal with you solely through the prism of law enforcement.  We’ve got to build trust and mutual respect.  That’s how we’ll keep our communities strong and our communities united.

	As I was in discussion with the young people before I came in here, I said this will be a process.  Law enforcement has a tough job.  Some of these groups are specifically trying to target Muslim youth.  We’re going to have to be partners in this process.  There will be times where the relationship is clumsy or mishandled.  But I want you to know that from the President to the FBI Director, to everybody in law enforcement, my directive and their understanding is, is that this is something we have to do together.  And if we don’t do it well, then we’re actually not making ourselves safer; we’re making ourselves less safe.

	And here, I want to speak directly to the young people who may be listening.  In our lives, we all have many identities.  We are sons and daughters, and brothers and sisters.  We’re classmates; Cub Scout troop members.  We’re followers of our faith.  We’re citizens of our country.  And today, there are voices in this world, particularly over the Internet, who are constantly claiming that you have to choose between your identities -- as a Muslim, for example, or an American.  Do not believe them.  If you’re ever wondering whether you fit in here, let me say it as clearly as I can, as President of the United States:  You fit in here -- right here.  (Applause.)  You’re right where you belong.  You’re part of America, too.  (Applause.)  You’re not Muslim or American.  You’re Muslim and American. (Applause.) 

	Don’t grow cynical.  Don’t respond to ignorance by embracing a world view that suggests you must choose between your faith and your patriotism.  Don’t believe that you have to choose between your best impulses and somehow embrace a world view that pits us against each other -- or, even worse, glorifies violence.  Understand your power to bring about change.  Stay engaged in your community.  Help move our country forward -- your country forward.  (Applause.)  

	We are blessed to live in a nation where even if we sometimes stumble, even if we sometimes fall short, we never stop striving for our ideals.  We keep moving closer to that more perfect union.  We’re a country where, if you work hard and if you play by the rules, you can ultimately make it, no matter who you are or how you pray.  It may not always start off even in the race, but here, more than any place else, there’s the opportunity to run that race.

	And as we go forward, I want every Muslim American to remember you are not alone.  Your fellow Americans stand with you -- just as Sabah described her friends after she decided that she was going to start wearing a hijab.  That’s not unusual.  Because just as so often we only hear about Muslims after a terrorist attack, so often we only hear about Americans’ response to Muslims after a hate crime has happened, we don’t always hear about the extraordinary respect and love and community that so many Americans feel.

	I’m thinking about the seven-year-old boy in Texas who emptied his piggy bank to help a mosque that had been vandalized. (Applause.)  Or all the faith communities that rallied around Muslim Americans after the tragedy in Chapel Hill.  The churches and the synagogues standing shoulder-to-shoulder with their local mosques, including the woman carrying a sign saying “We love our Muslim neighbors.”  Think of our men and women in uniform who, when they heard that a little girl was afraid because she’s a Muslim, sent her a message -- “I Will Protect You.”  (Applause.)

	I want every American to remember how Muslim communities are standing up for others, as well.  Because right now, as we speak, there are Muslims in Kenya who saved Christians from terrorists, and Muslims who just met in Morocco to protect religious minorities, including Christians and Jews.  (Applause.)  The good people of this mosque helped this city move forward after the turmoil of last year.  Muslim Americans across the country helped African American churches rebuild after arson. 

	Remember the Muslim Americans in Boston who reached out to victims of the Marathon bombing; the Muslim Americans across the country who raised money for the families of San Bernardino; the Muslim Americans in Chattanooga who honored our fallen servicemembers, one of them saying, “in the name of God, the God of Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad, God bless our fallen heroes.”  (Applause.) 

	We are one American family.  We will rise and fall together. It won’t always be easy.  There will be times where our worst impulses are given voice.  But I believe that ultimately, our best voices will win out.  And that gives me confidence and faith in the future.  (Applause.) 

	After more than 200 years, our blended heritage, the patchwork quilt which is America, that is not a weakness, that is one of our greatest strengths.  It’s what makes us a beacon to the world.  It’s what led that mother who wrote to me -- the one who worries about her young daughter -- it led her to end her letter with hope, despite her fears.  She said, “I still believe in one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.”  (Applause.)

	May God's peace be upon you.  May God bless the United States of America.  Thank you very much, everybody.  (Applause.) 

	END
	1:52 P.M. EST

	Today, Lisa O. Monaco, Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism met with Crown Prince Mohammad bin Zayed Al Nahyan and senior Emirati security officials in Abu Dhabi to discuss our shared efforts to degrade and destroy ISIL and al-Qa’ida in the Arabian Peninsula, and to review our cooperation with the UAE on other regional security issues.  Ms. Monaco and UAE officials agreed to further enhance our security and counterterrorism partnership as well as intelligence sharing with the United Arab Emirates.

	Ms. Monaco discussed with the Crown Prince and senior security officials U.S. efforts to work with international partners like the United Arab Emirates to counter ISIL’s expansion beyond Iraq and Syria. Ms. Monaco and the Crown Prince reaffirmed the importance of close counterterrorism cooperation in Yemen, to build on the already strong security partnership between the United States and the UAE, and for all parties in Yemen to resume political negotiations aimed at ending the conflict in Yemen as soon as possible.  They reviewed recent developments in Syria and coalition efforts against ISIL. They also reiterated our strong support for the process to seat a Libyan Government of National Accord following the United Nations-facilitated negotiations. Ms. Monaco concluded her visit with a tour of the Grand Mosque.

	For more than five years, a group of 12 countries have negotiated a forward-looking trade deal that sets new, high standards for trade and investment in one of the world’s fastest growing and most important regions. Today, these countries signed the Trans-Pacific Partnership – a new type of trade deal that puts American workers first.

	Right now, the rules of global trade too often undermine our values and put our workers and businesses at a disadvantage. TPP will change that. It eliminates more than 18,000 taxes that various countries put on Made in America products. It promotes a free and open Internet and prevents unfair laws that restrict the free flow of data and information. It includes the strongest labor standards and environmental commitments in history – and, unlike in past agreements, these standards are fully enforceable.  TPP allows America – and not countries like China – to write the rules of the road in the 21st century, which is especially important in a region as dynamic as the Asia-Pacific.

	Put simply, TPP will bolster our leadership abroad and support good jobs here at home. That’s why I released the full text of the agreement three months ago for all to see, and it’s why I’ll continue working with Democrats and Republicans in Congress to enact it into law as soon as possible so our economy can immediately start benefiting from the tens of billions of dollars in new export opportunities. We should get TPP done this year and give more American workers the shot at success they deserve and help more American businesses compete and win around the world. 
