
	During his State of the Union address, President Obama focused on America’s future and discussed the progress we’ve made on the economy since 2009. America is in the middle of the longest streak of private-sector job creation in history. Manufacturing has created nearly 900,000 new jobs in the past six years and the auto industry had its best year ever in 2015. And while there’s more work to be done to ensure a growing economy that works for all Americans, today, President Obama is visiting Detroit to experience firsthand the remarkable progress made by the American auto industry, the city and its people and neighborhoods.

	When President Obama took office, the American auto industry was shedding jobs by the hundreds of thousands, with GM and Chrysler on the brink of failure and facing the possibility of liquidation—which estimates at the time suggested would have caused at least 1 million more jobs to be lost across the supply chain and around the country. Detroit was flat on its back, with unemployment headed to a peak of more than 25 percent. Many in Washington opposed providing government assistance and were ready to write off not just the American auto industry but the entire City of Detroit.

	President Obama made the tough call in his first few months in office to place a bet on American workers and American manufacturing—and to place a bet on Detroit—by providing temporary Federal assistance to rescue the American auto industry. He also initiated a broader commitment to the City of Detroit that has been sustained and ongoing through a team of federal staff that partner with the Mayor, local business and community stakeholders to deliver tailored assistance, identifying unique programs and resources that have helped the people of Detroit get back on their feet. Because he acted quickly and aggressively, and demanded real change as a condition for government assistance, the American auto industry not only avoided a much deeper collapse but bounced back stronger than ever. Because he required the auto industry to modernize in exchange for that support, we are now producing the vehicles of the future that will enhance America’s competitiveness in the 21st Century and further reduce our dependence on oil.

	The Administration’s efforts in Detroit include the continuous engagement of top Federal talent to support the Mayor, his team, and local partners—from City Hall officials to neighborhood advocates—tailoring Federal government support to address Detroit’s unique needs and opportunities. Alongside the progress of the auto industry, Detroit has made significant strides too. Unemployment in the city has been cut by more than half, and is now at its lowest levels since 2003.  And because of the grit and determination of the people of Detroit and the President’s support, the city has begun a turnaround with brighter days ahead.

	Today, President Obama is visiting Detroit to witness that progress up close. He will have lunch with Mayor Mike Duggan and special guests; deliver remarks at the United Auto Workers-General Motors (UAW-GM) Center for Human Resources on the Detroit Riverfront; and tour the Detroit Auto Show to see the 21st-Century cars, trucks, and auto technology that will help the American auto industry stay on top.

The Auto Rescue and the Auto Industry Resurgence

	In late 2008, the American auto industry was on the brink of collapse. Access to credit for auto loans dried up and sales plunged 40 percent. In the year before President Obama took office, the industry shed over 400,000 jobs. Both GM and Chrysler were only weeks away from running out of cash and collapsing. Both companies faced the stark choice of seeking government support or facing almost certain uncontrolled liquidations, as no private source of credit was available anywhere near the scale needed. In this context, the Bush Administration extended short-term bridge loans to GM and Chrysler, but left it to President Obama to ultimately make the decision about how to resolve the industry’s historic crisis and what role, if any, the federal government should play. Following is a brief rundown of how the rescue played out:


Additional Government Support Was Deeply Unpopular: Providing additional support to the auto industry was strongly opposed in Washington. The auto rescue was described by Republicans in Congress as “the road toward socialism”; “nothing more than another government grab of a private company”; “without any plausible plan for profitability”; and “the leading edge of the Obama administration’s war on capitalism.” Both a December 2008 poll and a March 2009 poll found that more than 60 percent of Americans were opposed to the government extending assistance to General Motors and Chrysler to help them stay in business.

President Obama Required Fundamental Change in Exchange for Support: On March 30, 2009, after studying the plans submitted by GM and Chrysler, President Obama decided that he would not commit any additional taxpayer resources to these companies without requiring fundamental change and accountability in return for assistance. He rejected their initial viability plans and demanded that they develop more ambitious strategies to reduce costs and increase efficiencies.

The Damage from Allowing GM and Chrysler to Fail Would have been Immense: President Obama also recognized that failing to stand behind these companies would have consequences that extended far beyond their factories and workers. GM and Chrysler were supported by a vast network of auto suppliers, which employed three times as many workers and depended on the auto companies business to survive. An uncontrolled liquidation of a major automaker would have had a cascading impact throughout the supply chain, causing failures and job loss on a larger scale. Because Ford and other auto companies depended on those same suppliers, the failure of the suppliers could have caused those companies to fail as well. Also at risk were the thousands of auto dealers across the country, as well as small businesses in communities around the country that rely on the ongoing income from auto workers. Some experts estimated that were GM and Chrysler allowed to liquidate, at least 1 million additional jobs could have been lost. In addition, the cost to the government to provide social safety net services and health care to these workers and communities would have been substantial.

The President Placed His Bet on the American Auto Worker: To avoid this outcome, the President decided to give Chrysler, GM, and their stakeholders a chance to show that they could take the tough but necessary steps to become viable, profitable companies. Following the emergency loans to Chrysler and GM and a revamp of their businesses – with a total of $57 billion of additional taxpayer support committed by the Obama Administration – the companies returned to profitability, became more competitive, and served as engines for growth, leading a nationwide manufacturing recovery. By the end of 2014, the Administration exited the last investment under the auto rescue. Every dime of the funds provided by the Obama Administration had been repaid.


	Here are just a few indicators of the progress in the American auto sector since 2009:


Strongest Auto Job Growth on Record: Since Chrysler and GM emerged from bankruptcy in mid-2009, the auto industry has added more than 646,000 jobs across manufacturing and retail, the industry’s strongest growth on record. The more than 300,000 auto industry manufacturing jobs have led a manufacturing sector that has added nearly 900,000 jobs since job growth began nearly six years ago.

American Auto Production has Doubled and Auto Sales are at an All-Time High: America is once again a world leader in auto production and technology. Auto sales in the U.S. reached a record level of 17.4 million units in 2015, the strongest in history. And domestic production has more than doubled from below 6 million units per year in the depths of the crisis to about 12 million in 2015.

The Detroit Three are Hiring, Profitable, and Investing in the United States: GM, Chrysler, and Ford are adding jobs, generating profit, and investing in their U.S. facilities. Since GM and Chrysler exited bankruptcy, the Detroit Three have invested in facilities and added shifts at plants all across the country, totaling more than $30 billion in domestic investment. Each of the companies is now positioned to compete globally and conducting R&D on state-of-the-art fuel efficient, electric, and autonomous vehicles. The companies’ most recent agreements with the UAW commit to additional investments, additional raises, and additional jobs.

International Automakers are Investing in the United States Too: International automakers—recognizing the quality of our workforce and the strength and dynamism of the American economy—have $52 billion invested in U.S.-based production facilities and directly employ more than 97,000 Americans.

American Automotive Products Exports are up 89 Percent Since 2009: In 2014, the total value of U.S. automotive products exports was $160 billion, up 89 percent from 2009. And more than 60 percent of those exports in 2014 went to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) region, highlighting the opportunities presented to the American auto industry by the tariff cuts and elimination of non-tariff barriers included in TPP.

American Auto Technology is Again the Envy of the World: Due to American innovation and commonsense fuel efficiency standards, the fuel economy of new vehicles sold in the U.S. is at an all-time high, the cost of batteries has fallen 70 percent, and the distance our electric cars can travel on one charge has increased significantly. American automakers are expanding consumer choice and leveraging this progress to design lower-priced low-carbon and electric vehicles that are poised to be strong competitors in the global market while incorporating new technologies that have the potential to save thousands of lives per year. And they are not slowing down; one automaker recently announced they sought more patents for breakthrough technologies last year than they have in the last 100 years. 

Ramping Up Investments and Writing the Rules of the Road for the Auto Technologies of the Future: Autonomous vehicles (or “self-driving cars”) have the potential to transform transportation, giving us the chance to lead the world in a technology that can save lives, reduce emissions, and give new mobility to millions of elderly and disabled Americans. The President and his Administration are taking bold new steps to make that a reality, including by proposing to invest $4 billion in autonomous and connected vehicle research, development, and deployment efforts. To help accelerate deployment, last week Secretary Foxx announced at the Detroit Auto Show that he would take new regulatory action to move beyond piloting and testing for self-driving vehicles. Among those efforts will be redefining regulations in order to enable technology innovation, establishing a paradigm for testing and performance standards to ensure vehicle safety, partnering with states on model state legislation to prevent a patchwork of approaches that would slow down innovation, and proposing updates to our national rules of the road to accommodate self-driving vehicles.  In addition, earlier this year the Administration launched a $40 million Smart Cities Competition to challenge mayors across the country to develop strategies for deploying self-driving cars, autonomous vehicles, and smart sensors to prototype the future of transportation in their cities.


Federal Support for a Resurgent Detroit

	Over the past seven years, this Administration has been steadily taking a different approach to engaging in communities—disrupting an outdated, top-down way of doing business, and transforming the Federal government into a more effective partner for local stakeholders. This approach has led to the launch of numerous initiatives and partnerships in places across the country, such as the Strong Cities Strong Communities initiative, memorialized by a 2012 Executive Order, to embed full-time Federal staff with city governments to provide capacity and technical assistance to cities in economic crisis  

	The Administration has had a Strong Cities, Strong Communities team on the ground in Detroit since 2011. Detroit was one of the original fourteen cities to receive full-time Federal staff embedded in the city government to provide capacity and technical assistance by working directly with city leaders, local business, philanthropy, neighborhood and community leaders to identify federal resources, cut through red tape, and ultimately co-develop solutions with city leadership, helping local partners achieve their economic goals. In 2013, when Detroit filed for bankruptcy, the President appointed a special federal coordinator and interagency team to provide additional sustained municipal capacity and customized technical assistance, and assist in identifying existing federal resources to support the city. Detroit’s challenges were decades in the making and will not be resolved overnight, but this collaboration has led to some notable and steady progress.

	Today, the Detroit Federal team is working to provide a “one-government” approach, bringing federal resources and expertise across agencies together to support Detroit. At the direction of the President, this robust on-the-ground engagement with Detroit Mayor Mike Duggan has yielded impressive results. This partnership has led to many recent accomplishments, including:           


Significant Progress Toward Blight Elimination: The Treasury Department’s Hardest Hit Fund provided Michigan with more than $130 million that was directed to the City of Detroit for demolition. Detroit has taken down over 7,500 blighted structures in under two years while maintaining a careful balance between program speed, environmental impact, and cost. Independent studies found a payoff of more than 4:1 in increased property values as a result, and even greater increases where demolition was combined with other neighborhood improvements. Building auctions and rehabilitation are incorporated where possible and vacant lots are available for neighbors to purchase for $100.

Going from Half the City in the Dark to High-Efficiency Lighting Everywhere in Less than Two Years: In 2014, nearly half of Detroit’s 88,000 streetlights were dark. The Department of Energy provided technical assistance on advanced lighting to the newly established Public Lighting Authority (PLA), and in less than two years, the city will go from being in majority darkness to being re-lit with a smaller carbon footprint. Early estimates show that the LED street lights will save nearly 46 million kilowatts of energy per year, resulting in nearly $3 million in annual cost savings for the City. Anticipated emissions reductions are equivalent to the annual emissions from 10,993 passenger vehicles.

Supporting Workforce Training for Young People, the Long-term Unemployed, and the Formerly Incarcerated: Detroit received a $5 million demonstration grant from the Department of Labor to support additional workforce training for youth and the long-term unemployed. A portion of the funds is used to support an American Job Center (AJC) within a correctional facility and to launch a job preparation program for citizens returning to civilian life from incarceration. Detroit’s My Brother’s Keeper (MBK) Initiative works closely with these efforts to support returning citizens.

Meeting Detroit’s Full Bus Schedule for the First Time in Decades: With the support from a $25 million Department of Transportation grant, Detroit purchased 80 new buses so that the city can now, for the first time in decades, meet its full bus schedule. There are now 192 buses on the road daily, the most in more than 20 years, and 24-hour service was recently announced for some key routes. Ridership is up by 25,000 to 50,000 trips per week since adding the buses last year, while customer service complaints are down 20 percent.

Innovative TIGER Grants to Support a Regional Transit Authority and M-1 Rail: The Department of Transportation provided more than $25 million in TIGER grants to Detroit for the new M-1 Rail that connects the Downtown and Mid-Town corridors. The funding for the M-1 Rail inspired the creation of the Regional Transportation Authority (RTA), a long-sought goal of transportation planners.

Supporting Expanded Affordable Housing: In 2014 and 2015, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) closed on financing for 14 multi-family development projects, including substantial renovation or new construction of over 1,400 units of affordable and market-rate housing (with 600 renovations completed to date). HUD also provided over $16 million in capital funds to the Detroit Housing Commission to assist in the operation and renovation of Detroit’s public housing units, which has been returned to local control after a decade in receivership.

Investing in Green Infrastructure That Prevents Flooding: In the aftermath of a flooding disaster in August 2014, HUD provided $8.9 million for green infrastructure projects that will redirect water out of the over-loaded sewer system and into more sustainable gardens, bioswales, and tree plantings. The Environmental Protection Agency, in partnership with foundations and non-profits, has supported projects that allow vacant lots to be converted to rain gardens.

Developing a Comprehensive Plan for Spurring Manufacturing: Detroit was one of the first 12 communities designated as an Investing in Manufacturing Community Partnership (IMCP)—a Federal initiative to support comprehensive economic development strategies designed by communities. Through the Advance Michigan initiative, over thirty partner organizations banded together to build the region’s capabilities to master the next frontier of automotive technology and manufacturing through new supplier networks, infrastructure, export and foreign direct investment opportunities, and more. The IMCP designation also prompted Advance Michigan and its partners to commit to $177 million in training and workforce development activities to upgrade the region’s talent infrastructure through new talent attraction and training in the latest manufacturing technologies for incumbent workers.

Supporting Groundbreaking Auto Parts Research through Manufacturing Innovation Hubs and over $140 million in Public-Private Funding Going to Detroit: In 2014, Detroit won the competition for the Department of Defense's Lightweight Innovations for Tomorrow (LIFT) lab, bringing over $140 million in public-private investment in cutting-edge manufacturing research to Detroit's oldest neighborhood, Corktown. In 2015, the Department of Energy's Institute for Advanced Composites Manufacturing Innovation (IACMI) announced plans to co-locate some of its work with LIFT. This co-location joins two research facilities, reflecting how materials need to be joined and work together in cars of the future: lightweight metals working with advanced composites.

Bolstering Economic Development: The Department of Commerce's Economic Development Administration has invested over $5 million in the Detroit area since 2010, including NextEnergy’s improvements to a battery testing facility, as well as funds to support an advanced energy storage system cluster and developing an advanced manufacturing cluster. The Department of Energy awarded funds to NextEnergy to support clean energy small businesses and entrepreneurs.

Strengthening Global Engagement: Detroit sits on an international border with Canada that is the site for the New International Trade Crossing (NITC) approved in 2015. The Detroit-Windsor Border is the richest border in the world with more than $350 million in trade crossing every day, making global engagement an underused asset in Detroit's recovery. To that end, the State Department helped the Mayor launch the City’s first-ever Mayor’s Office of International Affairs in October, with Secretary Kerry. The team is assisting the Mayor in creating the city's first global engagement strategy, finding resources, leading trade missions, and developing a refugee resettlement strategy to support resettlement of refugees from Syria in support the of Administration's policy.


	In 2016, the Federal-Detroit partnership will continue to address the Mayor's priorities in expanding access to mortgage finance, building the workforce training system, developing Detroit's resiliency, and supporting global trade that benefit Detroiters.

	January 20, 2016

	Dear Mr. Speaker: (Dear Mr. President:)

	Section 202(d) of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1622(d)) provides for the automatic termination of a national emergency unless, within 90 days prior to the anniversary date of its declaration, the President publishes in the Federal Register and transmits to the Congress a notice stating that the emergency is to continue in effect beyond the anniversary date.  In accordance with this provision, I have sent to the Federal Register for publication the enclosed notice stating that the national emergency declared with respect to foreign terrorists who threaten to disrupt the Middle East peace process is to continue in effect beyond January 23, 2016.

	The crisis with respect to grave acts of violence committed by foreign terrorists who threaten to disrupt the Middle East peace process that led to the declaration of a national emergency on January 23, 1995, has not been resolved.  Terrorist groups continue to engage in activities that have the purpose or effect of threatening the Middle East peace process and that are hostile to United States interests in the region.  Such actions continue to pose an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States.  Therefore, I have determined that it is necessary to continue the national emergency declared with respect to foreign terrorists who threaten to disrupt the Middle East peace process and to maintain in force the sanctions against them to respond to this threat.

	 

	Sincerely,

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	NOTICE

	- - - - - - -

	CONTINUATION OF THE NATIONAL EMERGENCY WITH RESPECT TO

	TERRORISTS WHO THREATEN TO DISRUPT THE MIDDLE EAST PEACE PROCESS

	 

	On January 23, 1995, by Executive Order 12947, the President declared a national emergency pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701-1706) to deal with the unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States constituted by grave acts of violence committed by foreign terrorists that disrupt the Middle East peace process. On August 20, 1998, by Executive Order 13099, the President modified the Annex to Executive Order 12947 to identify four additional persons who threaten to disrupt the Middle East peace process.  On February 16, 2005, by Executive Order 13372, the President clarified the steps taken in Executive Order 12947.

	These terrorist activities continue to threaten the Middle East peace process and to pose an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States.  For this reason, the national emergency declared on January 23, 1995, and the measures adopted to deal with that emergency must continue in effect beyond January 23, 2016.  Therefore, in accordance with section 202(d) of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1622(d)), I am continuing for 1 year the national emergency with respect to foreign terrorists who threaten to disrupt the Middle East peace process.

	This notice shall be published in the Federal Register and transmitted to the Congress.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	Aboard Air Force One
	En Route Detroit, Michigan

	11:20 A.M. EST

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Welcome aboard, everyone, en route to Detroit, where the President will have an opportunity to experience firsthand the remarkable progress made by the American auto industry, the city and its people and neighborhoods in recovering from the Great Recession.

	As you all know, when the President first took office, the American auto industry was on the brink of collapse.  Sales had plunged 40 percent, and the industry was shedding jobs by the hundreds of thousands.  Both GM and Chrysler were only weeks away from running out of cash and collapsing.  At that time, the President made the tough call in the first few months of entering the presidency to place a bet on American workers and American manufacturing.  

	Because the President acted so quickly and aggressively, and demanded real change as a condition of the government assistance, the American auto industry not only avoided a much deeper collapse, but bounced back and is stronger than ever.

	For example, since 2009, the auto industry has posted the strongest job growth on record.  American auto has doubled production with auto sales at an all-time high.  We’ve seen American automotive products and exports go up 89 percent since 2009.  And once again, American auto technology is the envy of the world.  

	The President also initiated more broadly -- more broader than just the auto manufacturing industry a broader commitment to the city of Detroit that has resulted in a sustained commitment through our federal officials that partner with the mayor, local businesses and community leaders to deliver robust yet tailored assistance.

	So, alongside the progress of the auto industry, we’ve seen the city of Detroit make significant strides, as well.  Unemployment in the city has been cut by more than half, and now is at its lowest levels since 2003.  There is obviously much more work we can do, but the President wanted to take some time and make this trip, and really mark the remarkable progress that this city has undergone in the last few years.

	With that, I’m happy to take your questions.

	Q    Hey, Eric, two questions.  Is the President disappointed that despite the success of the auto industry, that the cars and vehicles that it keeps turning out continue to be the gas guzzlers that he opposed in 2009?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, Jeff, I think you’ve seen the President also do a lot of work in this issue space, and that includes new CAFE standards for our vehicles.  And he thinks that American car manufacturers recognize that that is the technology of the future, have embraced that, and have adopted that as their goal.

	Q    So with gas prices so low, SUVs are obviously still getting produced at record numbers and getting purchased at record numbers.  Is that something that the President is disappointed about?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  I see.  Well, I do think it’s important to note that the auto industry remains on track to meet targets that double their fuel efficiency and cut emissions by half by the year 2025.  So vehicle manufacturers are beating their standards for the third year in a row now.  And the President believes our fuel economy standards reduce economic vulnerability to this volatile market and spur innovation.  And we’ve seen results of that throughout the industry, especially in the context of the global markets.

	Q    Can I maybe I follow up on that?  Chrysler has met its targets, but it barely met its targets for the most recent year.  And it may have trouble meeting its emissions targets for next year.  Is the President concerned, following up on Jeff’s question, about the mix of cars and trucks that Chrysler is selling, and particularly that his auto task force chose Fiat for the merger partner?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Angela, I’m not going to have comment on every particular -- or any specific manufacturer.  But what I will say is, the President is encouraged by the progress these manufacturers are making to meet their goals. 

	Q    What is the White House’s reaction to Governor Snyder’s apology in his State of the State?  And does the EPA owe an apology, as well, to the residents of Flint?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Kevin, I did not have a chance to watch or read the Governor’s remarks in their entirety, but I did see some of the press coverage of it.  I don't have a direct response to that address.  I will say the President is deeply engaged on this issue.  He took time out of his day yesterday to meet with Mayor Weaver.  He came away from that discussion determined to get to the bottom of this, determined to resolve the situation as fast as humanly possible.  And that meant -- for him, that means mobilizing all possible federal resources to make sure that the federal government is doing what we can to help support state and local response efforts, because they have the primary responsibility on this.

	Q    If they have the primary responsibility, what is the EPA’s responsibility in the White House’s view, and did they meet that responsibility?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, if you would like a catalogue of how EPA has been engaged on this and been responding, you should probably check with them.  I'm sure they will be able to get that for you.  From our point of view, our focus right now is solving the problem.  And that's why the President, yesterday, announced a new federal coordinator, Dr. Nicole Lurie, who’s an Assistant Secretary at the Department of Health and Human Services.  She’s going to help coordinate all the federal resources that are being surged to Flint right now.  She’s actually in Flint today meeting with all the important stakeholders on the ground.  

	The President, as I mentioned, met with the Mayor yesterday, and he wants to make sure that we are marshaling all the resources of the federal government to address that problem.

	Q    Does the White House think Governor Snyder should resign?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Again, our view is everyone right now should be focused on the actual problem.  And that's why the President -- and I'm happy to walk you through some of what the President has directed his agencies to provide for Flint.  That includes the Department of Health and Human Services providing technical assistance so they can really make sure that water is as safe as humanly possible right now for the children and people of Flint. That also includes disseminating as much public health information as possible so that the people of Flint have access to the best information they can get.

	The CDC is on the ground providing technical assistance, also providing support for anyone with high lead levels in their blood.  FEMA is obviously on the ground -- has been on the ground for weeks now providing water filters and tens of thousands of liters of bottled water.  The EPA is obviously on the ground working to identify the sources of contamination and making sure that they can root that out.  HUD has been involved, making sure that -- what they’re doing is they’re providing the data tracking to make sure that there’s a full audit and accounting of where the problem is and how it can be stemmed.  And finally --

	Q    But you think that Governor Snyder is a trustworthy partner at the state level to help you get all these things done?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, I saw that the Governor yesterday accepted responsibility for this.  Clearly, the primary responsibility lies with local and state officials.  But that's not stopping the administration and this President from doing what they can to help support those response efforts.  

	Q    Eric, specifically on the question of EPA -- and I have checked with them -- obviously, part of what they’ve been saying is that Michigan officials were not as forthright in disclosing things to them as they could have been, and that impeded the effort.  However, there is an issue about a memo that an EPA officer drafted in April of last year, submitted to the EPA regional coordinator in June, and it was not publicly disclosed for some time.  Now, EPA says that it was circulated within the EPA regional office and that that helped inform their discussions with Michigan officials.  I'm just wondering that, as the President obviously responds to the concerns of the people of Flint, is the White House and the administration looking at that issue and to what extent EPA acted as quickly as possible in conveying concerns about elevated lead levels in the water?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, Juliet.  I have not seen any reporting on that particular memo.  I can say that clearly the notification process is part of the problem here, and the President is absolutely determined to figure out what went wrong, generally speaking.  And I know that a lot of this is under investigation, so I'm a little bit hindered in what I can say.  But all I can say is, broadly speaking, the President is concerned that something like this could happen in the greatest country on Earth, and that's why he’s determined to resolve it as soon as possible.

	Q    Can you comment on the attack against the university, the new terrorist attack which happened today?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Laura, I did see that report.  Obviously, we condemn in the strongest possible terms that attack.  And I think we might have more of a response later today.

	Q    And, Eric, on the question of a potential executive order requiring federal contractors to disclose their political contributions, obviously the White House has issued some comment on this today.  One of my questions is, can you discuss to what extent the White House feels constrained by existing language that Congress has passed which appears to affect contractors who would be bidding on federal contracts, and of course just elaborate a bit on this issue? 

	MR. SCHULTZ:  I'm glad you brought this up, Juliet, because this speaks to a theme that the President devoted significant time to in the State of the Union address, which is changing our politics.  And the President has long advocated for campaign finance reform, and expressed his opposition to the Citizens United decision that really opened the floodgates to special interest spending in our elections.

	The President took some steps when he first took the oath of office back in 2009 to limit special interest influence peddling in Washington.  But the President also viewed -- the most robust action we could take on this is an action that Congress failed to take when they considered a piece of legislation called the DISCLOSE Act.  That would have increased transparency and done a lot to further this goal.  Unfortunately, Senate Republicans banded together to block that.  

	And so, for our part, we are going to continue to consider actions we can take at the administrative level to combat this problem.  I don't have any specific measures to preview at this point.

	Q    Can you just talk about the legal landscape as it stands right now and how that would affect anything the administration could do in the same way that obviously there are limits because the Senate did not act in 2012?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, as Josh is fond of saying, he’s not a lawyer -- I'm not a lawyer.  But I can tell you that any executive action that would be vetted through our system and announced by the President would be on solid legal footing.

	Q    Eric, the stock market has taken another tumble today. Can you issue the White House’s reaction to that?  And are you concerned that this continuation of a stock fall and the oil prices staying low suggests a greater problem or a deeper problem in the world economy, and that that will affect the U.S.?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Jeff, like Josh, I’m not going to comment on the day-to-day moves in the markets.  The President is regularly briefed on these developments that relate to the economy, and we obviously monitor the ongoing volatility.  That's a process that's principally housed at the Department of Treasury.  

	But I can say more broadly, the President believes our U.S. economy continues to grow, and we have ample data to back that up.  For example, U.S. businesses have added 14.1 million jobs in 70 consecutive months of private sector job growth.  This, as you know, is the longest stretch of private sector job growth on record.  But what remains clear is that we need to stay focused on what we can do to strengthen job growth here at home.  The President has several proposals to do just that, one of which is urging Congress to pass the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  That's a deal that's going to help America’s businesses and help America’s workers.

	I should also add that there’s no better case study for the resilience of the American economy than where we're headed right now.  Detroit, as we talked about, was on the precipice of collapse.  And thanks to not only the President’s leadership in 2009, but mostly to the grit, determination, and ingenuity of the American worker, they're resurging.

	Q    Is the President going to address the Volkswagen cheating scandal today during his address?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  I don't believe that's going to be in the President’s remarks.

	Q    Will we hear him talk about Flint today in either of his appearances?

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Angela, I, again, don't have a preview of his remarks.  But the purpose of today’s visit is to really mark the remarkable comeback of Detroit.

	Q    Thanks, Eric.

	MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, guys.

	END 
	11:34 A.M. EST

	 

	UAW-GM Center for Human Resources
	Detroit, Michigan

	3:49 P.M. EST

	THE PRESIDENT:  Hello, Detroit!  (Applause.)  It’s good to be back in Michigan -- even though it might be just a little cold here.  (Laughter.)  But I’m from Chicago, so I’m used to it.  

	A couple people I want to start off by introducing.  First of all, Detroit is coming back, and everybody deserves credit for that.  But one person who deserves special credit for it is your mayor, Mike Duggan.  He’s doing an outstanding job.  (Applause.)  And we’re very proud of him.  You’ve got four outstanding members of Congress.  Debbie Dingell.  (Applause.)   The Dean, John Conyers.  (Applause.)  Brenda Lawrence.  (Applause.)  Sandy Levin.  (Applause.)  We’ve got one of the finest congressmen who ever served, and a great friend of Detroit -- John Dingell is here.  (Applause.)  There he is.  

	And a dear friend of mine -- we drove over together, and I was just telling my team, when I was running for the United States Senate -- not for the President -- when I was running for the United States Senate, and nobody knew who I was and nobody could pronounce my name -- (laughter) -- the regional leader of the UAW in Illinois was a guy named Dennis Williams.  (Applause.)  And he was my friend and supporter before just about anybody else out there.  And then, when I ran for President, by that time we’d made some great friends in the UAW, and so I just want to say how proud I am to call him a friend.  Your UAW president, Dennis Williams.  (Applause.)   

	And give it up for Cindy for that outstanding introduction.  (Applause.)  

	AUDIENCE MEMBER:  -- my mom!

	THE PRESIDENT:  That’s your mom?

	AUDIENCE MEMBER:  That’s my mom.

	THE PRESIDENT:  Are you proud of your mom?  

	AUDIENCE MEMBER:  I’m very proud of my mom!

	THE PRESIDENT:  Oh, look at that.  Well, you’re like out of a TV show.  What, are you like a child actor, or something?  Look at him.  He’s all handsome.  Yeah.  (Laughter.)  All right, Cindy, he’s a pretty impressive young man.

	I want to pick up briefly on something that Cindy said, and that is just to talk for a second about what’s happening in Flint.  I am very proud of what I’ve done as President -- (applause) -- but the only job that’s more important to me is the job of father.  And I know that if I was a parent up there, I would be beside myself that my kids’ health could be at risk.  And that’s why, over the weekend, I declared a federal emergency in Flint to send more resources on top of the assistance that we’ve already put on the ground.  We’ve designated a federal coordinator to make sure the people of Flint get what they need from their country.

	Yesterday, I met with Mayor Weaver in the White House, in the Oval Office, and I told her that we are going to have her back and all the people of Flint’s back as they work their way through this terrible tragedy.  It is a reminder of why you can’t shortchange basic services that we provide to our people and that we, together, provide as a government to make sure that the public health and safety is preserved.  (Applause.)  

	But I have come to Detroit for another reason, as well.  I already drive in a great American car, which we affectionately know as the Beast.  (Laughter.)  Next year I’ve got to give it up.  I’m saying goodbye to the Beast.  So I figured that I needed to do a little browsing now at the Detroit Auto Show.  I know they’ve got auto shows in Paris and Frankfurt and Tokyo.  But there’s only one Motor City.  There’s only one Detroit.  (Applause.)  And if you’re looking for the world’s best cars and the workers who make those cars, you need to be in Detroit, Michigan.  That’s why I’m here.  (Applause.)  

	AUDIENCE MEMBER:  CT6! 

	THE PRESIDENT:  He said the GT6 -- CT6.  All right.  

	AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Get that!

	THE PRESIDENT:  Well, I’m looking at all of them now.  (Laughter.)  

	AUDIENCE MEMBER:  (Inaudible.)  (Laughter.)  

	THE PRESIDENT:  All right, I got the idea.  I’m not going to tell you all what I’m buying now.  (Laughter.)  

	AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Jeep Grand Cherokee!  (Laughter.)  

	THE PRESIDENT:  Now, I will say, the Cherokee was my first new car I ever bought.  (Applause.)  Somebody was asking me -- I didn’t get a new car until I was, like, 32.  (Laughter.)  I always had an old, beat-up hoopty.  (Laughter.)  But my first brand-new car with the brand-new car smell was a Jeep Cherokee.  And I thought I was a bad man once I was in that car.  (Laughter.)  I was all up high, looking at the road.  Man.  (Laughter.)  

	I could not be prouder of this industry and the road that we’ve traveled together.  And I’m proud of each and every one of you.  Think about what you’ve fought through.  It wasn’t that long ago that a crisis that started on Wall Street sparked a great recession on Main Street, and it cost millions of Americans their jobs, their homes, the savings that they had worked a lifetime to build.  Nearly one in five autoworkers got a pink slip, laid off from a job in an iconic industry that had been a ticket to the middle class for generations.  And across the Midwest, plants closed with little hope of reopening.  

	So the American auto industry -- the beating heart of American manufacturing -- was flat-lining.  That’s where we were when I took office seven years ago today.  The year before I took office, the auto industry had laid off 400,000 people -- 400,000.  And we had a choice to make.  

	With the economy in a freefall, the markets frozen, there were no private companies, there were no private investors who were going to step up and take a chance on you.  So we could have kept on handing over billions of taxpayer dollars to automakers, but things didn’t change and it just got worse -- that would have just kicked the can down the road.  Or we could have done nothing, thrown in the towel, walked away from this industry entirely.  And a lot of folks suggested we do that.  They’d deny it later, but that’s what they said at the time.  

	AUDIENCE MEMBER:  But not you!  (Applause.) 

	THE PRESIDENT:  Think about what that would have meant for America.  GM and Chrysler would not exist today.  Suppliers and distributors that get their business from those companies would have died off.  And when that happened, Ford could have gone down, too.  Because those supplier chains are vital to all three industries -- or all three companies.  Production stopped.  Factories shuttered.  Proud companies chopped up, sold off for scraps.  And all of you, the men and women who built these companies with your hands, would have been hung out to dry.  

	More than one million Americans would have lost their jobs at the worst possible time -- not just autoworkers, but the people in communities that depend on you -- the teachers who teach your kids, the small business owners who know your name.  Their livelihoods were at stake, as well. 

	And so we decided we’re not going to let that happen, and we came up with another option.  In exchange for help, we demanded responsibility.  We said that the auto industry would have to truly change, not just pretend like it was changing.  The industry retooled, it restructured.  Management and labor got together to settle your differences.  Everybody put some skin in the game.  Everybody sacrificed for the sake and survival of this industry.

	And it wasn’t popular.  It wasn’t even popular in Detroit.  Wasn’t even popular in Michigan.  But I said at the time, I didn’t run for President to be popular.  I ran for President to do what needed to be done.  (Applause.)  And I placed my bet on you.  And after visiting auto plants across the Midwest, and seeing what you have done firsthand, let me tell you, I’d make that same bet any day of the week.  Because today, factories are humming, business is booming, the American auto industry is all the way back -- all the way back.  (Applause.) 

	Seven years ago, auto sales hit a 27-year-low.  Last year, they hit an all-time high.  Across the country, workers who thought that they’d never make another car again can’t make them fast enough.  You guys see it.  New shifts are coming on.  Big Three are starting to boost wages.  Since our plan kicked in, the American auto industry has added more than 640,000 new jobs.  And because everybody came together and everybody worked together, not only are you producing more cars, but they’re some of the most high-tech, most fuel-efficient, best-looking cars in the world.  They’re designed and engineered and forged and built right here in the United States of America.  (Applause.)   

	And because the auto industry came back, that obviously gave the capacity for Detroit to start coming back.  So you’ve now cut the city’s unemployment rate by more than half.  Folks aren’t writing off Detroit anymore.  Starting five years ago, I sent some of my top people across the federal government to help City Hall and ordinary citizens to spark that comeback here in the Motor City.  So today you’ve got buses that are running again, streets that are well-lit again, new homes and businesses getting off the ground again.  There’s still plenty of work to do, but you can feel the difference.  You can feel something special happening in Detroit.   

	I stopped by a restaurant to have lunch with the mayor and a good friend of mine, Tom, who started Shinola here, and one of you outstanding autoworkers, and an emergency room doctor.  What was that restaurant’s name?  

	AUDIENCE MEMBER:  The Jolly Pumpkin!

	THE PRESIDENT:  The Jolly Pumpkin.  That was tasty stuff.  (Laughter.)  And then I went over to Shinola -- now, I already have this Shinola watch.  It’s a good-looking watch.  (Applause.)  Made right here.  And for you who don’t know the story of Shinola and how it started -- a factory here in Detroit and hiring folks who had never been involved in manufacturing before, and now it’s got over 500 employees and it’s shipping these spiffy-looking watches and bicycles and belts and wallets and purses.  It’s some good-looking stuff.  

	And the people who work there -- we were talking about how there was a woman who was homeless, got a job there as a janitor, is now the supervisor of one of the assembly processes over there to make the watches.  Completely turned her life around.  Well, that’s the story of Detroit when you give people a chance, when you have confidence in what we can do together. 
	 
	And so what’s true of Detroit is true of the country.  And that’s part of the reason I came here.  I’m shopping for a car -- (laughter) -- but right now, I want people to remember how far we’ve come.  And it’s not -- I’m not running for office again.  The reason I want to remind people is not because I’m on the ticket; it’s because I want America to have confidence in where we can go.  I talked about this at the State of the Union address.  

	Seven years ago, we put in place new plans to help hardworking families get back on their feet.  We put folks back to work rebuilding roads and bridges.  We passed big, new middle-class tax cuts.  We asked the wealthiest Americans, who were doing fine, even through the recession, to pay a little bit more, pay their fair share.  We rethought our health care system.  We reinvented our energy sector.  We put in place the toughest Wall Street reforms in history.  And today, businesses like this one have added more than 14 million new jobs.  This has been the longest streak of job creation in our history -- in our history.  (Applause.) 

	The United States of America, right now, has the strongest, most durable economy in the world.  We’re doing so much better than other folks are doing.  The American economy right now is 10 percent bigger than it was at its peak, before the financial crisis.  In Europe, it hasn’t gotten back to where it was back in 2007-2008.  

	AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr. President!  (Applause.)  

	THE PRESIDENT:  We’ve added more jobs than almost all the other advanced countries combined during this period.  

	So when you hear people -- I won’t say who -- but when you hear people claiming that America is in decline, they don’t know what they’re talking about.  They’re peddling fiction during a political season.  And it’s strange to watch people try to outdo each other in saying how bad things are.  When one says our economy is terrible, the next says it’s terrible and on fire, and covered in bees.  (Laughter.)  And they’ll just come up with stuff.  They’re racing to see who can talk down America the most.  

	But remember -- and this is why I want everybody to remember -- these are the same folks who would have let this industry go under.  (Applause.)  These are some of the same folks who back in Washington called our plan to save the auto industry “the road to socialism;” said it was going to be a “disaster;” said “they’ll run it into the ground.”  Those are quotes, by the way.  I’m not making that up.  Look it up.  And so when I hear, today, some of these folks running for President, who can’t bring themselves to admit what you guys have accomplished, I don’t want you to take that seriously.  Because when you ignore the progress we’ve made, then you’re not going to make good choices about where we need to go in the future.  (Applause.)  

	If they’re still trying to spin a tale that the auto rescue was a bad idea, the same folks who predicted that you’d fail, they had other predictions about policies, too.  They predicted gas prices would hit $6.50 a gallon.  I don’t know what you all are paying right now, but it ain’t no $6.50.  (Applause.)  In most places, it’s $2.00 or less.  On the way here, we saw gas for less than two bucks.  But that’s what they said -- it’s going to be $6.50.

	Then they predicted all the deficits are going to go way, way up.  We cut our deficits by almost three quarters.  (Applause.)  They’ve been below average for the past 40 years. They said we’ll get unemployment to 6 percent by 2016.  Well, we got it down to five about a year ahead of schedule -- of their schedule.  

	This is the crowd that was dead set against betting on you and your hard work, and your professionalism and your skills.  They’ve somehow still convinced themselves that cutting taxes for folks at the very top is going to help you succeed.  I think there’s a better plan.  By the way, they said when we raise taxes on the folks at the very top who had been doing great, they said, oh, well, that’s going to kill jobs.  And guess what -- 70 months straight of job creation now.  (Applause.)  Just like they said when Obamacare passed -- oh, that’s going to be terrible -- 18 million people with health insurance who didn’t have it before.  (Applause.)  

	So, now, this is not to make an argument for complacency.  I’m not suggesting we should be satisfied where we are.  Because what is true is, the economy has been changing in profound ways for the last 20, 30 years.  You’ve all seen it.  Technology has made it easier to replace jobs on the assembly line.  That’s been going on for a long time.  Any job where work can be automated is in danger of being replaced.  The attacks on unions have been going on for a long time.  And when union participation is down, workers have less leverage to get a raise.  (Applause.)   

	The fact that companies can move because of increased technology means more global competition.  And all these trends have squeezed workers, even when they’ve got jobs, even when the economy is growing -- which means that a lot of Americans sometimes feel anxious.  And that tells us we’ve got more work to do.  But as I said at the State of the Union, if we’re going to solve those problems for working families and middle-class families, for your neighbors, for your friends, for your kids, your grandkids, then we’ve got to have smart answers -- not just a bunch of fantasies that end up helping the folks who don’t need help.  

	In this economy, we got to make sure that everybody who works hard has a chance at opportunity and security.  And real opportunity in this new economy means every American has got to get the education and training they need to land a good-paying job.  I know that any of your fathers or grandfathers who worked in an auto plant, they wouldn’t recognize a plant today.  It’s just entirely different.  And you’ve got to know computers and you’ve got to have skills that didn’t even exist a generation ago.  So that means that we’ve got to really make sure our kids are properly trained.  

	And the good news is, last year our high school graduation rate reached another all-time high.  And we’ve got to build on that progress with early childhood education for every child that needs it so they get a good start, and computer and math classes to make kids job-ready in this new economy.  And we should recruit and support and pay properly great teachers for our kids.  (Applause.)  We’ve got to make college affordable for every American.  And college doesn’t mean necessarily a four-year degree.  It might mean a community college.  It might mean a technical school.  But you’re going to need more than just high school, which is why I’ve laid out a plan to provide two years of community college at no cost for every responsible student.  (Applause.)  I’m going to fight to get that done, to get that moving this year.  (Applause.)  

	Then we’ve got to think about real security.  Now, this is a union facility.  So you know the importance of secure health benefits and secure retirement benefits.  But not everybody in this new economy has that.  So real security in this new economy, in addition to encouraging workers to join together so they have a voice and some leverage, also means benefits and protections you can count on.  

	When Social Security and Medicare are more important than ever, we shouldn’t weaken Social Security and Medicare, we should strengthen Social Security and Medicare.  (Applause.)  For Americans that are short of retirement, benefits should be mobile, like everything else.  That’s what we did with the Affordable Care Act.  The idea with the Affordable Care Act was not to replace employer-based care.  But it was to say if you lost your job -- as some of you did -- and you tried to buy it on COBRA, and it was so expensive you couldn’t even think about it; or if you decided you wanted to go back to school for more training; or let’s say you decided you wanted to start a new business -- you had a chance to still get some coverage at a reasonable price and good quality.  And, as I said, 18 million people have gained coverage so far.  

	So now we should make sure that when folks lose their job, the system works for them.  For example, they should be able to get unemployment insurance that encourages retraining for a business that’s ready to hire.  And if a new job doesn’t pay as much, there should be a system of wage insurance in place so that folks, if they take a job with the hope of retraining and ultimately getting a better job, in the meantime they can still pay their bills.  (Applause.)  And if you take a part-time job or a temporary job before you get to find that full-time job, you’d have some insurance, some cushion.  And when folks are going from job to job, they should still be able to save for retirement and take their savings with them.  See, all that would make this new economy work better for everybody.  

	Even as we work to secure real opportunity and security for working families, we’ve also got to make sure that the system is not rigged against working families.  Now, GM, Ford, Chrysler -- those are all great companies.  Shinola is a great company.  I believe in private enterprise.  I believe in the incredible dynamism of the American economy, and that’s business.  And America’s business is business.  We love business.  

	But after years of corporate profits, we also have to make sure that business is sharing what it makes with the workers who make it.  (Applause.)  That’s the American way.  Henry Ford used to talk about, I’ve got to pay my workers enough so they can buy my cars.  That’s good for business.  And so working families are not going to get more opportunity or bigger paychecks by letting big banks or big oil or hedge funds write their own rules and do whatever they want.  You’re not helping middle-class families by allowing a tax on collective bargaining to go unanswered.  And I’m not going to back down on my belief that we’ve got to have strong rules to protect the air that our kids breathe and the water that they drink.  It is more important than ever.  (Applause.)   

	And, by the way, I should just point out that the auto industry here in the United States has figured out that we can make more fuel-efficient cars that reduce the carbon pollution that’s causing climate change, and make a profit, and put more people to work.  There’s no contradiction between creating jobs and economic growth and caring for the environment.  

	And in this new economy, workers and parents and startups and small businesses, they need more of a voice, not less.  So this year, I’m going to lift up some of the businesses who have figured this out -- what it means to do right by your workers and the fact that that’s good for your bottom line.  A lot of our best corporate citizens are also our most creative and our most innovative.  And in this new economy is that spirit of creativity and innovation that we need more than ever.  

	So you got to be thinking about the future, not just the past.  And that’s what you’re doing here in Detroit.  You’re not just making cars that people want today, you’re thinking about cars that people are going to want tomorrow.  When I was over at the auto show, I saw plug-in hybrids and electrics and fuel-efficient cars that can protect our planet, save people money at the pump.  You’re working on self-driving cars that one day could prevent accidents and save lives.  This year, my administration is going to take steps to get more of those cars on the road.  Right here at GM and UAW, we’re teaming up to train American workers for the good-paying jobs of the future.  (Applause.)  

	That’s the kind of spirit that’s going to lead us forward, that says we’re all in it together, we’ve all got a stake in each other’s success.  It doesn’t always get a lot of attention.  But all across this country, if you just look for it, all kinds of good things are happening.  And all the division and yelling and rudeness and controversy that gets spun up and manufactured -- that’s not who we are.  That’s not how we live on a day-to-day basis.  At your workplace, everybody is on the same team trying to get the job done.  You might have a disagreement; you try to figure it out.  You don’t start shouting.  You don’t start saying, well, I like those kind of people but not those kind of folks.  

	And, by the way, the UAW, part of the reason it succeeded was it was one of the first unions to realize that we’re all in this together, and didn’t divide people up.  (Applause.)  You look at the history of the UAW -- (applause) -- it was one of the first unions to say, no, we’re going to take everybody.  If you’re working hard, if you’re doing the right thing, trying to raise your family, we’re going to be better off if we’re hand in hand trying to make sure workers get a fair deal -- even if we don’t look like each other, even if we don’t all worship at the same place.  (Applause.)  That’s what built the UAW.  That’s what built America.  (Applause.)  That’s what built America.  (Applause.)  

	But I see it all across the country.  I see it in the Leathers family from Sterling Heights.  So, Steve Leathers -- I just want to tell a quick story here -- works for a company called Empire Wire and Supply.  And during the crisis, they had to lay off nearly 20 percent of their workers.  So Steve’s friends were losing their jobs.  His neighbors were losing their homes.  So one night, he tells his wife if things didn’t get better, they might have to leave, too.

	Steve didn’t know it at the time, but his 13-year-old daughter, Brianna, heard what he said -- because, I’ve discovered, kids hear everything.  So you all got to watch what you say around your kids.  They’ll repeat it back to you -- sometimes 10 years later.  (Laughter.)  So without telling her dad, Brianna sat down and she wrote me a letter.  Thirteen years old.  She said, “Dear President Obama, I am 13 years old, and I am worried about my family’s future in Michigan.  My dad,” she wrote, “works for a company that manufactures cables for the automotive companies.  This industry isn’t doing so well, but these guys are still doing okay.”

	So Brianna is here today.  Where’s Brianna?  There you are, right there.  She’s older now.  (Applause.)  So Brianna is 13 years old now -- or she’s 19 years old now.  This was six years ago.  She’s a young lady.  She’s working her way through Macomb Community College.  Her twin brother, Brendan -- is that Brendan right next to her?  He’s at Oakland University, a half hour away.  Dad is still in Michigan -- that’s dad.  But today, Steve’s future is very different.  

	But before the crisis, Steve’s company had about 110 employees.  Today, they’ve got nearly 200.  (Applause.)  Brianna says -- she’s looking back and she says, “I remember a lot of people getting laid off.  They all have jobs now.”  Steve remembers what it was like back then, there was a panic.  Now, he says, I’m 110 percent confident we’re going in the right direction.  

	Now, Steve and his family, they’re just one example.  But those stories are multiplying all across the country.  We don’t hear a lot about them.  They don’t get on TV.  You won’t always read about them in the newspapers.  Sometimes we take it for granted.  

	But I remember.  And I read Brianna’s letters.  And that’s why I’ve got so much confidence in the future -- because of you.  I know that we’ve got young students like Brianna and Brendan.  I know we’ve got workers like Steve who have proven that we’re tougher than any kind of times that we might face.  I’m confident because every one of you who clock in every day and work as hard as you can, not just for your own sake, but for the sake of this industry, and for the sake of the country, and because you take pride in what you do.  And when you see that car rolling down the highway and you know, hey, I built that thing -- (applause) -- and you know it’s a great product, and it gives you a sense of being part of something bigger -- that makes me confident about the future.

	I’m hopeful about our future because of every single American that I’ve met who never stopped believing that the people who love this country can change it for the better.  You are what makes America great.  And I want you to know that I have faith in you.  And when I leave this office, I’ll still have faith in you.  (Applause.)  And every day that I have the privilege of holding this office, I’m going to have faith in you.  

	And we’re going to work side by side to make sure more folks got jobs, and more folks got better wages and benefits, and more people have the ability to join a union when they want to, and more people are able to start businesses, and more people have health benefits, and more companies are thriving.  And this country is going to keep on moving forward.  And I know it’s going to happen because of you.  

	Thank you, Detroit.  God bless you.  God bless the United States of America.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  

	END                
	4:23 P.M. EST
