
	EXECUTIVE ORDER

	- - - - - - -

	ESTABLISHING A FEDERAL EARTHQUAKE RISK MANAGEMENT STANDARD

	     By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act of 1977, as amended, and section 121(a) of title 40, United States Code, and to improve the Nation's resilience to earthquakes, I hereby direct the following:

	     Section 1.  Policy.  It is the policy of the United States to strengthen the security and resilience of the Nation against earthquakes, to promote public safety, economic strength, and national security.  To that end, the Federal Government must continue to take proactive steps to enhance the resilience of buildings that are owned, leased, financed, or regulated by the Federal Government.  When making investment decisions related to Federal buildings, each executive department and agency (agency) responsible for implementing this order shall seek to enhance resilience by reducing risk to the lives of building occupants and improving continued performance of essential functions following future earthquakes.  The Federal Government recognizes that building codes and standards primarily focus on ensuring minimum acceptable levels of earthquake safety for preserving the lives of building occupants.  To achieve true resilience against earthquakes, however, new and existing buildings may need to exceed those codes and standards to ensure, for example, that the buildings can continue to perform their essential functions following future earthquakes.  Agencies are thus encouraged to consider going beyond the codes and standards set out in this order to ensure that buildings are fully earthquake resilient.

	     Sec. 2.  Requirements for Earthquake Safety of New Federal Buildings, Improvements to Existing Federal Buildings, and Federally Leased, Financed, or Regulated Buildings.

	     (a)  New Buildings and Alterations to Existing Buildings.  Each agency responsible for the design and construction of a new building or an alteration to an existing building shall ensure that the building is designed, constructed, or altered, respectively, in accord with appropriate earthquake-resistant design and construction codes and standards as set forth in sections 3(a) and 3(b) of this order.

	     (b)  Space Leased for Federal Occupancy.  Each agency responsible for the lease of a building shall, to the extent permitted by law, ensure that it leases only buildings that have been designed and constructed in accord with the

	2

	appropriate earthquake-resistant design and construction standards that apply to the type of lease at issue, as set forth in section 3(c) of this order.

	     (c)  Federal Assistance Programs.  Each agency assisting in the financing, through Federal grants or loans, or guaranteeing the financing, through loan or mortgage insurance programs, of a newly constructed building shall consider updating its procedures for providing the assistance to be consistent with section 3(a) of this order, to assure appropriate consideration of earthquake safety.

	     (d)  Federally Regulated Buildings.  Each agency with responsibility for regulating the structural safety of a new building shall consider using earthquake-resistant design and construction standards for the new building consistent with section 3(a) of this order.

	     Sec. 3.  Codes, Standards, and Concurrent

	Requirements.  (a)  Commencing within 90 days after the date of this order, each agency shall ensure that every new building for which the agency has not started programming is in compliance with the earthquake-resistant design provisions of the 2015 editions of the International Building Code (IBC) or the International Residential Code (IRC), nationally recognized building codes promulgated by the International Code Council (ICC), or equivalent codes, consistent with the provisions of and to the extent required by 40 U.S.C. 3312.  When the ICC releases a new version of the IRC or IBC, each agency that constructs buildings shall determine whether the new version is a nationally recognized code for the purposes of 40 U.S.C. 3312(b), as expeditiously as practicable, but not later than 2 years after the release of the new version.  If an agency determines that a new version is a nationally recognized code, it shall ensure that any building, for which the agency has not started programming, shall be in compliance with that new version or an equivalent code.

	     (b)  Each agency that owns an existing Federal building shall adopt the Standards of Seismic Safety for Existing Federally Owned and Leased Buildings (Standards), which are developed, issued, and maintained by the Interagency Committee on Seismic Safety in Construction (ICSSC), as the minimum level acceptable for managing the earthquake risks in that building.  Any agency that has not adopted the Standards at the time of this order shall adopt the Standards no later than 90 days from the date of this order.  All agencies shall adopt subsequent editions of the Standards as expeditiously as practicable, but no later than 2 years following their issuance.

	     (c)  Each agency that leases space in an existing building shall adopt the Standards as the minimum level acceptable for managing the earthquake risks in that building.  This requirement shall apply to existing leases or leases existing at the time of issuance of updated Standards only to the extent appropriate, as determined by the leasing agency.  With respect to leases for a building being constructed to accommodate a Federal agency under the authority in 40 U.S.C. 585(a), the leasing agency shall ensure that the building complies with the earthquake-resistant design and construction standards that

	3

	would apply to a building constructed by the agency pursuant to section 3(a) of this order.  With respect to such leases entered into under authority other than 40 U.S.C. 585(a), the leasing agency shall ensure that the building complies with the earthquake-resistant design and construction standards that would apply to a building constructed by the agency pursuant to section 3(a) of this order, to the extent permitted by law.

	     (d)  Agencies may require higher performance levels than exist in the codes and standards described in sections 3(a), (b), and (c) of this order.

	     Sec. 4.  Agency and Committee Responsibilities.  (a)  The ICSSC shall be composed of representatives of all Federal agencies engaged in construction, financing of construction, or related activities.  The National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) Lead Agency, currently the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), shall lead the ICSSC, and shall lead the development and maintenance of ICSSC guidelines to assist the Federal agencies with implementing earthquake risk reduction measures in their construction programs.

	     (b)  Agencies whose activities are covered by this order shall designate one or more Seismic Safety Coordinator(s) to serve as focal points for the agency's compliance with this order and to participate in the ICSSC as appropriate.  Within 30 days of the date of this order, each agency shall identify its Seismic Safety Coordinator(s) to the Director of NIST.

	     (c)  The Director of NIST, on behalf of the ICSSC, shall issue implementing guidelines to assist agency compliance with this order within 8 months of the date of this order.  The implementing guidelines shall provide specific guidance, including guidance about the roles and responsibilities of the agencies under section 2 of this order.  The implementing guidelines shall also describe the responsibilities and necessary qualifications of the Seismic Safety Coordinator.

	     (d)  The Director of NIST, on behalf of the ICSSC, shall provide assistance in interpreting the implementing guidelines to the Federal departments and agencies.

	     (e)  The ICSSC shall publish updated Standards for assessing and enhancing the earthquake resilience of existing buildings as required by this order.  The ICSSC shall review and update the Standards as needed to comply with this order at the maximum interval of every 6 years.  Participation in the ICSSC shall continue to be open to all agencies with programs affected by this order.  The Director of NIST shall provide support for the secretariat of the ICSSC and determine the frequency and scope of the ICSSC meetings as necessary to support this order.

	     (f)  Agencies whose activities are covered by this order shall submit biennial reports to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the Director of NIST on their progress in implementing the order, commencing 2 years from the date of this order.

	     (g)  Agency compliance shall be summarized in the NEHRP reports to the Congress.

	4

	     Sec. 5.   Revocation.  Executive Order 12699 of January 5, 1990 (Seismic Safety of Federal and Federally Assisted or Regulated New Building Construction), as amended, and Executive Order 12941 of December 1, 1994 (Seismic Safety of Existing Federally Owned or Leased Buildings) are hereby revoked.

	     Sec. 6.  Definitions.  As used in this order:

	     (a)  "building" means any structure, fully or partially enclosed, used or intended for sheltering persons or property;

	     (b)  "alteration to an existing building" means an action that alters, as defined in 40 U.S.C. 3301(a)(1), a building and that significantly extends the building's useful life and totals more than the replacement values established in the Standards for the building's assigned Seismic Design Category; and

	     (c)  "programming" means developing and validating project assumptions, scope, budgets, and implementation strategy for a building.

	     Sec. 7.  Exemption Authority.  (a)  The head of an agency may exempt a building from sections 2 and 3 of this order:

	          (i)   to the extent the head of an agency determines that exempting such building is substantially related to an important law enforcement purpose; or

	(ii)  to the extent the head of an agency determines that exempting such building is necessary to address an extraordinary circumstance relating to national security or public safety.

	     (b)  Even when otherwise eligible for an exemption under this section, each agency shall strive to comply with the purposes, goals, and requirements set forth in this order to the maximum extent practicable.

	     (c)  If the head of an agency issues an exemption under this section, the agency must notify the Director of OMB in writing within 30 days of issuance of the exemption under this subsection.

	     Sec. 8.  General Provisions.   (a)  Nothing in this order shall be construed to impair or otherwise affect:

	(i)   the authority granted by law to an executive department, agency, or the head thereof; or

	(ii)  the functions of the Director of OMB relating to budgetary, administrative, or legislative proposals.

	     (b)  This order shall be implemented consistent with applicable law and subject to the availability of appropriations.

	     (c)  This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.

	5

	     (d)  Nothing in this order shall apply to assistance provided for emergency work essential to save lives and protect property and public health and safety, performed pursuant to agencies' statutory authorities, and sections 402, 403, 502, and 503 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (the "Stafford Act") (42 U.S.C. 5170a, 5170b, 5192, and 5193), or for temporary housing assistance programs and individual and family grants performed pursuant to section 408 of the Stafford Act (42 U.S.C. 5174).  This order shall, however, apply to other provisions of the Stafford Act after a Presidentially declared major disaster or emergency when assistance actions involve new construction or alterations to an existing building.

	     (e)  This order applies only to buildings within the United States and its territories and possessions.

	BARACK OBAMA

	THE WHITE HOUSE,

	    February 2, 2016.

	# # #

	The Administration today announced an FY2017 Department of Defense funding request of $3.4 billion for the European Reassurance Initiative (ERI).  This request, which quadruples last year’s ERI funding level, represents a significant augmentation of our efforts to ensure peace and security in Europe.  Over the past two years, the United States has increased military activities in Eastern and Central Europe to reassure allies and partners of our commitment to their security and territorial integrity.  The persistent, rotational U.S. air, land, and sea presence in the region provided for by ERI funding began following the Russian occupation of Crimea and continues today.  In June 2014, President Obama announced the ERI to increase U.S. force presence in Europe, expand exercises and training with NATO Allies and partners, and augment prepositioned equipment for use in joint exercises.  Allies reinforced these efforts at the September 2014 NATO Summit in Wales when they agreed to the Readiness Action Plan, which included a series of assurance and adaptation activities to enhance NATO’s defense posture and increase allied readiness and responsiveness.  The ERI budget request for 2016 of nearly $800 million, which Congress fully supported, provides continued U.S. participation in assurance activities and additional steps to build the resilience and capability of allies and partners.

	The FY2017 ERI request marks a significant upgrade of these efforts and is intended not only to continue assurance measures but also to enable a quicker and more robust response in support of NATO’s common defense.  ERI funding will enable the United States to expand and deepen activities within five established lines of effort:


Increase Presence:  The United States will maintain its commitment to a persistent rotational presence of air, land, and sea forces in Central and Eastern Europe for training.  In order to enhance deterrence, the United States will also augment its force presence in Europe through continuous U.S. armored brigade rotations.

Conduct Additional Bilateral and Multilateral Exercises and Training:  In addition to increased presence, the enhanced U.S. force presence in Europe will enable more extensive U.S. participation in exercises and training activities with NATO allies and partners, improving overall readiness and interoperability. 

Enhance Prepositioning:  As announced in June 2015, the European Activity Set (EAS), which includes one U.S. armored brigade combat team's vehicles and associated equipment, is being prepositioned on the territory of several NATO allies, including Bulgaria, Estonia, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and Romania, in order to support exercises and training throughout Europe.  The FY2017 request will place additional Army Prepositioned Stock (APS) in Europe.  These additional combat vehicles and supplies are intended to reduce force deployment times and enable a rapid response to potential contingencies.

Improve Infrastructure:  Improvements throughout Europe on installations such as airfields, training centers, and ranges, will improve allied military readiness in the region and provide for quick dispersal of forces if required.

Build the Capacity of Allies and Partners:  ERI funding will continue to build the capacity of Central and Eastern European allies and partners to defend themselves and enable their full participation as operational partners in responding to crises in the region.


	A list of U.S. military efforts to date under the President’s European Reassurance Initiative can be found at: http://www.eucom.mil/operation-atlantic-resolve

	The Obama Administration remains committed to improving the resilience of our communities, States, and the Nation to important hazards, such as earthquakes. A 2015 scientific assessment from the U.S. Geological Survey shows that more than 143 million Americans in the continental United States could experience potentially damaging earthquakes. This estimate is nearly double the previous 2006 estimate because populations have grown in earthquake-prone areas and there are now better methods for estimating earthquake risks. Improving warning systems, better building protections, and informed citizens can help mitigate losses, injuries, and deaths, and also can help communities recover faster.

	Today, the White House is hosting an Earthquake Resilience Summit to highlight how a whole-community approach—including scientists, engineers, public officials, nonprofit entities, and private companies—is the best approach for improving resilience to earthquakes and other hazards; and to explore how science and technology can improve our ability to detect and respond to earthquakes in the future. 

	At the summit, the Administration and stakeholders will announce new commitments toward a future with greater earthquake safety based on next-generation approaches to earthquake-resilient building and warning technologies, including:

Executive Order for Enhanced Seismic Safety

	President Obama today signed an Executive Order: Establishing a Federal Earthquake Risk Management Standard, which will improve the capability of federal buildings to function after an earthquake, reducing risks to people, lowering post-quake recovery costs, and making it easier for communities to recover swiftly. The Executive Order requires that Federal agencies responsible for the design and construction of a new building, or an alteration to an existing building, ensure that the building is constructed or altered using the earthquake-resistant design provisions in the most current building codes. The latest building codes, which encompass the current understanding of the earthquake hazard potential, are one of the best ways to achieve earthquake safety and preserve the lives of the people who live in a building. This Executive Order will also help ensure that federal assets are available to support recovery efforts.

Federal Actions to Advance Earthquake Early Warning


		On February 1, 2016, the United States Geological Survey (USGS), along with partners from state government, universities, and private foundations deployed a beta operational phase of ShakeAlert, the West Coast earthquake early warning test system. This next-generation production prototype will allow beta users to develop and deploy pilot implementations that take protective actions based on the USGS ShakeAlert warnings in areas with sufficient station coverage.

USGS and the United States Forest Service are announcing that they have begun working together to explore streamlined and expedited permitting for siting of seismic monitoring stations with an initial emphasis on sites important for earthquake early warning and other locations supporting life and safety. 

		The independent Federal Communications Commission recently issued one set of new proposed rules, which is out for public comment, and another, released January 28, 2016, which is not yet out for comment, that pertain to earthquake early warning and other next-generation warning systems. The proposed rules would:
		

				facilitate the delivery of narrowly geo-targeted alerts, such that warnings can be targeted to receivers’ locations and everyone in a location can receive a warning;

				reduce alert delivery delays throughout the IPAWS (Integrated Public Alert and Warning System) and other alerting systems;

				integrate Emergency Alert System tests, including actual alert signals and text, into community public safety exercises;

				ensure that alerts will be consistent across different technology platforms, including those that use the internet; and

				facilitate community feedback to alerts using 911 and social media so that alert initiators can know that the alerts are effective and allow them to efficiently direct resources to areas in need.




State and Local Commitments to Advance Earthquake Early Warning


State of Oregon: Governor Kate Brown is committed to increasing Oregon’s seismic readiness. Having just hired a State Resilience Officer, the Governor is directing the officer to prominently feature earthquake early warning in the state resilience planning efforts as the officer’s first order of business. Oregon also took a significant step in 2015 by acquiring 15 seismometers for nearly $700,000. The Governor wants the State to build on that investment in collaboration with universities and other stakeholders interested in saving lives and capacity through early warning. A crucial component of Oregon’s effort is the integration of a robust public-education program giving businesses, schools, critical facilities, and the public actionable information on how to respond to earthquake alerts.

The City of Eugene, Oregon: The City of Eugene, Oregon, will host public forums to further explain earthquake preparedness, answer questions the community may have, and empower the community with knowledge and resources.

The Eugene Water and Electric Board: Eugene Water and Electric Board (EWEB) and the University of Oregon will place four earthquake early warning sensors on EWEB property, which will contribute to the Pacific Seismic Northwest Network, a USGS facility maintained by the University of Washington and the University of Oregon. The sensors will improve the coverage and reliability of the Pacific Seismic Northwest Network.

State of Washington: Today, Governor Jay Inslee is announcing commitments that the State of Washington is making in earthquake and tsunami preparedness and resilience, in order to protect lives and speed the recovery of communities in the aftermath of a large-scale seismic event. Washington has experienced approximately 15 major destructive earthquakes in the last 150 years, and its proximity to the Cascadia Subduction Zone—a major fault line off the Pacific Coast of North America—presents the dangers of significant earthquakes and tsunamis in the region. The new commitments include seismic improvements for state building standards; investing $4.6 million to map, identify, and better anticipate geologic hazards; and a tsunami safe haven project that will open in June 2016 at Ocosta Elementary School in Westport, Washington.


Additional Commitments to Advance Earthquake Early Warning


The Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation is announcing $3.6 million in grants to advance the ShakeAlert system. The funding to California Institute of Technology; University of California, Berkeley; University of Washington; and the U.S. Geological Survey supports the research behind the technology to detect earthquakes, determine likely magnitude, and provide a warning before shaking begins, potentially saving thousands of lives and millions of dollars in damage. This new funding will take advantage of the particular strengths of each research group to advance three important areas of early warning:

		

				UC Berkeley scientists will pursue a novel plan to detect the shaking caused by earthquakes, harnessing the same sensors used in smart phones to count your daily steps; 

				Caltech scientists will work to develop a humanlike decision-making process to gather information from seismic networks to issue prompt and reliable alerts; and

				University of Washington scientists will study implementation of a network of sensors on the ocean floor to provide early warning for earthquakes from the Cascadia Subduction Zone, the largest threat for a catastrophic earthquake in the Pacific Northwest.



Puget Sound Energy is announcing a $100,000 grant to the University of Washington Pacific Northwest Seismic Network for the purchase of eight strong-motion seismometers that will be installed throughout Washington during the next four years. These modern, low-delay instruments will significantly improve earthquake early warning capability.

Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) has recently agreed to join the ShakeAlert beta system and is beginning to work with UC Berkeley’s Seismological Laboratory to identify potential applications. This will allow both automated and human actions in the seconds before an earthquake, which will protect lives, lessen property damage and ensure rapid service restoration. PG&E values the potential for early earthquake warnings for their customers and employees. PG&E will continue its participation in the test phase and system build out for California and the West Coast.

Intel Corporation has committed to help lead an effort to ensure private sector businesses play an appropriate role in building and sustaining the ShakeAlert Earthquake Early Warning. Initial meetings are being held this week.

		As Oregon’s largest private sector employer and largest capital investor, Intel designs and builds its latest generations of microprocessors and other computing innovations at four major campuses in the Portland Metro area. Intel views ShakeAlert as a key part of its Crisis Management program, and has pledged to lead efforts to bring the high-technology community to the table to support it. The business impacts from a Cascadia Subduction Zone earthquake would be extreme. Having advance notice of an event will allow Intel and other private sector companies to safely react to an earthquake before it occurs, saving millions of dollars per hour in potential downtime. Businesses such as Intel will be able to advise staff to take protective actions, such as Drop, Cover and Hold, as well as automatically shut down elevators and production. Intel’s leadership role will catalyze their suppliers and customers, as well as other businesses, to support the ShakeAlert system.

Amazon Catalyst is announcing a research grant to the University of Washington to integrate GPS capabilities into the Pacific Northwest Seismic Network in order to better discriminate the size of large earthquakes, a problem that current earthquake warning systems cannot solve well.


	 

	TO THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES:

	Pursuant to my constitutional authority and as contemplated by section 446 of the District of Columbia Self-Government and Governmental Reorganization Act as amended in 1989, I am transmitting the District of Columbia's fiscal year (FY) 2016 Budget and Financial Plan.  This transmittal does not represent an endorsement of the contents of the D.C. government's requests.

	The proposed FY 2016 Budget and Financial Plan reflects the major programmatic objectives of the Mayor and the Council of the District of Columbia.  For FY 2016, the District estimates total revenues and expenditures of $13.0 billion.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	WASHINGTON, DC – On February 29, 2016, President Barack Obama will present the Medal of Honor to Senior Chief Special Warfare Operator Edward Byers, U.S. Navy.  Senior Chief Byers will receive the Medal of Honor for his courageous actions while serving as part of a team that rescued an American civilian being held hostage in Afghanistan on December 8-9, 2012. 

	Senior Chief Byers will be the eleventh living service member to be awarded the Medal of Honor for actions in Afghanistan.  He and his family will join the President at the White House to commemorate his example of selfless service.

PERSONAL BACKGROUND:  

	Senior Chief Byers was born in Toledo, Ohio on August 4, 1979.  He graduated from Otesgo High School in Tontogany, Ohio in June 1997.

	Senior Chief Byers currently holds a National Paramedics License, and will graduate from Norwich University with a Bachelor of Science in Strategic Studies and Defense Analysis in early 2016. 

	Senior Chief Byers entered the Navy in September 1998, attending boot camp and Hospital Corpsman School at Great Lakes, Illinois.  He served at Great Lakes Naval Hospital, and then with 2nd Battalion, 2nd Marine Regiment at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.  In 2002, he attended the Basic Underwater Demolition/SEAL course, graduating from Class 242, and completed the Special Operations Combat Medic course in 2003.  Senior Chief Byers has been assigned to various east coast SEAL teams, and completed eight overseas deployments with seven combat tours.

	Senior Chief Byers’ awards and decorations include five awards of the Bronze Star Medal with Combat V device, two awards of the Purple Heart, the Joint Service Commendation Medal with Valor device, the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal with Combat V device, two additional awards of the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal, two awards of the Combat Action Ribbon, three Presidential Unit Citations, two Joint Meritorious Unit Awards, two Navy Unit Commendations, and five Good Conduct Medals.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

	THE MEDAL OF HONOR:

	The Medal of Honor is awarded to members of the Armed Forces who distinguish themselves conspicuously by gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of their own lives above and beyond the call of duty while:


		engaged in an action against an enemy of the United States;

		engaged in military operations involving conflict with an opposing foreign force; or

		serving with friendly foreign forces engaged in an armed conflict against an opposing armed force in which the United States is not a belligerent party.


	There must be no margin of doubt or possibility of error in awarding this honor.  To justify this decoration, the deed performed must have been one of personal bravery and self-sacrifice so conspicuous as to clearly distinguish the individual above his or her comrades, and must have involved risk of life.   It must also be the type of deed which if not done would not subject the individual to any justified criticism.

	 

President’s Budget includes new mandatory funding to help ensure that all Americans who want treatment can get the help they need

	Prescription drug abuse and heroin use have taken a heartbreaking toll on too many Americans and their families, while straining resources of law enforcement and treatment programs. More Americans now die every year from drug overdoses than they do in motor vehicle crashes. New data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) show that opioids—a class of drugs that include prescription pain medications and heroin—were involved in 28,648 deaths in 2014.  In particular, CDC found a continued sharp increase in heroin-involved deaths and an emerging increase in deaths involving synthetic opioids, such as fentanyl.

	The President has made clear that addressing the opioid overdose epidemic is a priority for his Administration and has highlighted tools that are effective in reducing drug use and overdose, like evidence-based prevention programs, prescription drug monitoring, prescription drug take-back events, medication-assisted treatment and the overdose reversal drug naloxone. Under the Affordable Care Act, substance use disorder services are essential health benefits that are required to be covered by health plans in the Health Insurance Marketplace. The law also required that covered substance use disorder benefits are comparable to medical and surgical benefits.

	The President’s FY 2017 Budget takes a two-pronged approach to address this epidemic.  First, it includes $1 billion in new mandatory funding over two years to expand access to treatment for prescription drug abuse and heroin use. This funding will boost efforts to help individuals with an opioid use disorder seek treatment, successfully complete treatment, and sustain recovery.  This funding includes: 


		$920 million to support cooperative agreements with States to expand access to medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorders. States will receive funds based on the severity of the epidemic and on the strength of their strategy to respond to it.  States can use these funds to expand treatment capacity and make services more affordable. 

		$50 million in National Health Service Corps funding to expand access to substance use treatment providers.  This funding will help support approximately 700 providers able to provide substance use disorder treatment services, including medication-assisted treatment, in areas across the country most in need of behavioral health providers.

		$30 million to evaluate the effectiveness of treatment programs employing medication-assisted treatment under real-world conditions and help identify opportunities to improve treatment for patients with opioid use disorders.


	This investment, combined with other efforts underway to reduce barriers to treatment for substance use disorders, will help ensure that every American who wants treatment can access it and get the help they need.   

	Second, the President’s Budget includes approximately $500 million -- an increase of more than $90 million -- to continue and build on current efforts across the Departments of Justice (DOJ) and Health and Human Services (HHS) to expand state-level prescription drug overdose prevention strategies, increase the availability of medication-assisted treatment programs, improve access to the overdose-reversal drug naloxone, and support targeted enforcement activities. A portion of this funding is directed specifically to rural areas, where rates of overdose and opioid use are particularly high.  To help further expand access to treatment, the Budget includes an HHS pilot project for nurse practitioners and physician assistants to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid use disorder treatment, where allowed by state law.

Building on Actions to Address the Opioid Epidemic

	In October 2015, the President announced a number of new public and private sector actions to address this issue, including a Presidential Memorandum on prescriber training and opioid use disorder treatment. He also announced a commitment by more than 40 provider groups that more than 540,000 health care providers will complete training on appropriate opioid prescribing in the next two years. After just over three months, these groups reported that more than 66,000 providers have completed prescriber training to date, putting them on target to meet their goal.

	In December, the President signed a bipartisan budget agreement with more than $400 million in funding specifically to address the opioid epidemic, an increase of more than $100 million over the previous year. The agreement also revised a longstanding ban on using federal funds to support syringe service programs, which can help reduce the transmission of HIV and viral hepatitis by confronting one major source of the outbreaks: injection drug use, including opioids.

	These actions build on efforts that began in 2010 when the President released his first National Drug Control Strategy, which emphasized the need for action to address opioid use disorders and overdose while ensuring that individuals with pain receive safe, effective treatment.  In 2011, the White House released its national Prescription Drug Abuse Prevention Plan, which outlined goals for addressing prescription drug abuse and overdose.  

	Since then, the Administration has supported and expanded efforts to prevent drug use, pursue “smart on crime” approaches to drug enforcement, improve prescribing practices for pain medication, increase access to treatment, work to reduce overdose deaths, and support the millions of Americans in recovery: 

Community Prevention and Overdose Response


		The Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), in collaboration with the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), supports local Drug-Free Communities coalitions to reduce youth substance use through evidence-based prevention.  In recent years, hundreds of these coalitions have specifically focused on prescription drug misuse issues in their areas.

		With support from the Administration, prescriber education programs have been developed to teach medical professionals skills such as how to start a conversation with patients about their substance use; managing pain appropriately; and treating patients using opioids more safely. In response to a Presidential Memorandum, federal agencies are leading the way by making certain that their workforce is properly trained. In addition, ten states have passed legislation requiring training for prescribers.

		In FY 2016, HHS will implement the $10 million Strategic Prevention Framework for Prescription Drugs to raise awareness about the dangers of misusing prescribed medications and to work with pharmacy and medical communities to address the risks of overprescribing to young adults. The FY 2017 Budget continues this effort.

		With support from the Department of Justice (DOJ) and other funders, 49 states have established Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs to help prescribers identify potential opioid misuse issues—up from 30 states at the start of the Administration.

		The federal government is expanding access to prescription drug monitoring program data throughout federal agencies. The Department of Defense’s (DoD) Pharmacy Data Transaction Service automatically screens all new medication orders against a patient’s computerized medication history and permits DoD physicians to monitor for concerning drug usage patterns. The Indian Health Service has successfully piloted integrating this data into their electronic systems, and a pilot to integrate data into the workflow of physicians in the DoD health system is slated to launch in 2016.

		Through the National Take Back Days to remove unused prescription drugs from communities, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) has collected more than 5.5 million pounds of medication.  DEA also finalized a new rule making it easier for communities to establish ongoing drug take-back programs.

		ONDCP has worked with federal, state, and local government agencies and other stakeholders to expand access to the lifesaving opioid overdose reversal drug naloxone, including equipping first responders. Today, hundreds of law enforcement agencies across the country carry and are trained to administer naloxone. Additionally, prior to 2012, just six states had any laws that expanded access to naloxone or limited criminal liability for persons who took steps to assist an overdose victim. Today, 46 states and the District of Columbia have enacted statutes that expand access to naloxone or provide “Good Samaritan” protections for possession of a controlled substance if emergency assistance is sought for a victim of an opioid overdose.

		The Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) supports the Opioid Overdose Education and Naloxone distribution program to help Veterans at risk of an opioid overdose.  This program is a key objective of VA’s safety initiatives.  In the less than two years since the program was implemented, over 12,000 Veterans have received a naloxone kit, and there have been 141 reported reversals as of December 2015.

		In September 2015, CDC launched a $20 million Prescription Drug Overdose: Prevention for States initiative in 16 states to expand their capacity to put prevention into action in communities nationwide and encourage education of providers and patients about the risk of prescription drug overdose. In 2016, the initiative received a further increase of $50 million dollars to expand these state prevention activities to a national scale.

		The DOJ Bureau of Justice Assistance released a Law Enforcement Naloxone Toolkit to support law enforcement agencies in establishing naloxone programs. The toolkit has been downloaded more than 2,200 times in the last year.

		DOD is ensuring that opioid overdose reversal kits and training are available to every first responder on military bases or other areas under its control.

		In 2016, SAMHSA will provide a total of $12 million specifically to increase use of the overdose reversal drug naloxone.  States can use these funds to purchase naloxone, equip first responders with naloxone, and provide training on other overdose death prevention strategies.  The FY 2017 Budget will continue these investments and includes an additional $10 million to address opioid overdose in rural areas, including through expanding access to naloxone.

		In November 2015, the President signed bipartisan legislation, the Protecting Our Infants Act, to help identify evidence-based approaches to care for mothers and their newborns affected by the opioid epidemic.

		In December 2015, the Indian Health Service (IHS) and the Bureau of Indian Affairs announced a new partnership to reduce opioid-related overdoses among American Indians and Alaska Natives. In 2016, the more than 90 IHS pharmacies will dispense naloxone to as many as 500 BIA Office of Justice Services officers and will train these first responders to administer emergency treatment to people experiencing an opioid overdose.

		Using the most recent scientific evidence, the CDC has been working with clinical experts and other stakeholders to develop guidelines on prescribing opioids for chronic pain.  The guidelines will be used to help improve the way opioids are prescribed and help providers offer safer, more effective chronic pain treatment, while reducing opioid misuse, abuse and overdose.

		Using its fast-track and priority review systems, FDA recently approved for the first time a nasal spray version of naloxone hydrochloride, providing an easy to administer way to deliver this lifesaving drug. The National Institute on Drug Abuse helped develop this product through a partnership to apply new technology towards developing interventions for opioid overdose.


Treatment


		In FY 2016, SAMHSA will support grants to 22 States to support medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorders in high need communities.  The FY 2017 Budget will expand the number of States that will receive funding to 45. 

		In 2016, the Health Resources and Services Administration will award up to $100 million to Health Centers across the country to improve and expand the delivery of substance use disorder services, with a focus on medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorders.

		HHS Secretary Burwell announced that the Department will engage in rulemaking related to the prescribing of buprenorphine-containing products approved by the FDA for treatment of opioid dependence to expand access to medication-assisted treatment for opioid use disorders.  HHS will take a strategic approach in order to minimize diversion and ensure evidence-based treatment.

		In conjunction with the Budget rollout, HHS also will release Medicaid guidance to States on best practices for addressing the opioid epidemic focused on Medicaid pharmacy benefit management strategies to manage and monitor prescription opioid prescribing, cover medication-assisted treatment, and increase the use of the overdose reversal drug naloxone.


Enforcement and Supply Reduction


		The White House Office of National Drug Control Policy's High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas program is funding an unprecedented network of public health and law enforcement partnerships to address the heroin threat across 15 states.

		DEA has deployed a 360 Strategy targeting the opioid epidemic through coordinated law enforcement operations, diversion control and partnerships with community organizations following enforcement operations.

		DOJ’s enforcement efforts include targeting the illegal opioid supply chain, thwarting doctor-shopping attempts, and disrupting so-called “pill mills.”

		DOJ has cracked down on those who use the Internet to illegally buy and sell controlled substances.  

		DEA agents and investigators are integrating with other federal, state, and local law enforcement officers in 66 Tactical Diversion Squads stationed across 41 states, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia.  Outcomes of this effort include the largest pharmaceutical-related takedown in the DEA’s history in an operation that resulted in 280 arrests.

		Since 2007, through the Merida Initiative, the Department of State has been working with the Government of Mexico to help build the capacity of Mexico’s law enforcement and justice sector institutions to disrupt drug trafficking organizations and to stop the flow of illicit drugs including heroin from Mexico to the United States. 


	To learn more about the opioid epidemic or to find treatment options for patients, family or friends, visit www.hhs.gov/opioids.

	James S. Brady Press Briefing Room

	12:52 P.M. EST

	     MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Nice to see you.  I do not have any comments at the top, so we can go straight to your questions.

	     Josh, do you want to start?

	     Q    Sure.  I wanted to get the President’s reaction to the Iowa caucuses last night.  Was he glad to see Donald Trump defeated?  Was he concerned to see the amount of support that Ted Cruz garnered in the Republican primary -- caucus?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Josh, I did not have a chance to talk to the President about the caucus results last night, so I’m sorry to disappoint you on that front.  I think, in general, what I can share with you is that for at least a generation, Republican candidates aspiring to work in this building have tried to claim the mantle of President Reagan.  While they’ve sought to claim his mantle, they have utterly failed in trying to claim his message of sunny optimism -- at least this year. 

	     We’ve seen a campaign that’s been characterized by candidates trying to exploit people’s fears and anxieties and insecurities about the future.  And those candidates ended up doing pretty well last night.  And I think it’s why a lot of Democrats wake up this morning, at least at this point, not particularly concerned about the potential match-up that we would face in a general election when you consider that all of the candidates are now under more pressure than ever to sort of adopt this pessimism and darkness in terms of assessing the future of the greatest country on planet Earth. 

	     The Democrats, on the other hand, have been pretty forward-leaning, talking about the opportunity that exists for middle-class families, and the need to put in place policies in Washington, D.C. that actually will do more for the middle class. And that draws the outlines of a general election whose outcome bodes quite well for Democrats.

	     Q    A lot of people here at the White House are obviously very interested and engaged in seeing a Democratic successor to this President.  Looking at the results of the Democratic caucuses last night, is there concern here at the White House that a drawn-out slugfest between Hillary Clinton and an upstart candidate who is doing very well with young people could be difficult for the party or weaken the party’s eventual nominee, heading into the general election?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think, Josh, even in framing your question you’re sort of noting some of the echoes to 2008.  I think while it’s not a perfect analogy, I think it’s an apt comparison.  And many people worried about the same thing in 2008, about Senator Obama and Senator Clinton getting sucked into a long, bloody, drawn-out primary campaign that could hurt the general election candidate -- or hurt the Democrats in a general election.  It turned out that the opposite was true -- that the drawn-out primary campaign in 2008 had the effect of sharpening and improving the skills of both candidates on the stump and on the debate stage.  It had the effect of forcing Democratic campaigns in just about all 50 states to build up a turnout operation that yielded important benefits in the general election. 

	There are a lot of my colleagues who were focused on the ground operation that said that the aggressively competitive Democratic primary in the state of Indiana -- I believe Election Day in 2008 in the primary in Indiana was in May, so sort of something that was basically unprecedented in at least the modern political schedule -- led directly to the President’s ability to win Indiana in the general election.

	     So I don’t know if that’s going to be the case in 2016, but those concerns in 2008 were unfounded.  And I think there’s certainly the potential that you could find in 2016 that a message that has -- or a campaign and a debate that has clearly energized Democrats in Iowa -- and I think we’ll see energized Democrats in New Hampshire, too -- that having this campaign go to some other states would have the effect of energizing some Democrats in other states that eventually would be beneficial to whichever candidate emerges as the Democratic nominee.

	     Q    Turning to the meetings here today at the White House, the President and congressional leaders.  I know that at least the lunch portion of the agenda is probably still going on, but from the earlier portion with McConnell and Ryan, do you have any early readout you can give us or sense of what the leaders spoke about?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I can give you sort of a brief overview of their discussion.  The President spent some time sort of highlighting five of the priorities that he’s hopeful that we can work with Congress on this year.  The first of those is addressing the crisis in Puerto Rico.  I know that Speaker Ryan and other leaders in the House of Representatives have committed to taking action in the first quarter of this year to try to give government authorities in Puerto Rico more tools that they can use to address the financial challenges that are facing Puerto Rico.

	     The second topic of discussion was ratifying the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  Both Speaker Ryan and Leader McConnell are obviously committed supporters of an agreement that would cut taxes on 18,000 American goods that are imposed by other countries.  So there’s an opportunity to discuss the path forward there, and obviously the President is eager to see Congress take that action as soon as possible this year so that the U.S. economy and U.S. businesses and American workers can start enjoying the benefits of that agreement.

	     There was also a discussion of additional steps that the administration and Congress can take to fight the opioid epidemic.  Heroin abuse is actually something that has gotten a lot of discussion on the campaign trail.  And you may have seen the announcement from the White House earlier today about the additional resources that we would like to commit to fighting heroin abuse in communities large and small all across the country.  We’ve certainly been pleased to see this issue get a lot of bipartisan attention in the context of the presidential race, particularly in New Hampshire.  So today seemed like an appropriate day for us to talk about some of the administration’s plans for confronting that significant challenge.

	     Just two other things that I’ll mention.  Yesterday there was the meeting of administration officials to discuss the cancer moonshot initiative that the Vice President is leading.  There has been interest expressed by Republicans in Congress to supporting that effort, and that was discussed today. 

	     And then of course they talked about criminal justice reform.  And we’ve seen a lot of bipartisan discussions take place on that issue, frankly, for more than a year now, so it shouldn’t be surprising that that came up in the meeting as well.

	     Q    Just before he came over here this morning, Speaker Ryan was saying that basically the best thing about the Iowa caucuses last night was that it signaled the start of the end of the Barack Obama presidency.  And I was wondering what the outlook from a lot of Republicans that they’re basically trying to run out the clock on this administration -- does that bode well for compromise or some progress on the issues that you just mentioned?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Josh, I think that’s an appropriate question when you consider that the President is not going to be on the ballot in 2016.  But all the Republicans in the House of Representatives are going to be, and a third of the United States Senate is going to be on the ballot, too.  And there will be a lot of voters who are asking those members of Congress exactly what they’ve been doing for the last two years and what they’ve done to earn their vote, particularly when you consider that Republicans, with a lot of fanfare, captured strong majorities in both Houses of Congress in the last election and I think a lot of voters are going to be asking incumbents what exactly they’ve done with that privilege. 

	     And so this goes to something that I mentioned a little bit last week.  There’s a lot of coverage lately of some Republicans on Capitol Hill -- not a majority, but some Republicans on Capitol Hill -- signaling a desire to undermine potential bipartisan cooperation between Republicans on Capitol Hill and Democrats in the White House -- and whether that is approving TPP, or working on criminal justice reform.  And that’s, understandably, covered by many in the news media as a rejection of the President’s legislative agenda. 

	We obviously would like to see those two things advanced, and we’re certainly going to be invested in trying to advance those two priorities in our legislative agenda.  But it begs the question about what exactly is on the Republican legislative agenda.  The only thing that we can reliably count on appearing on the Republican legislative agenda are repeated attempts to repeal Obamacare.  Republicans are poised to host another vote in the United States Congress today, for the 60th time, to repeal Obamacare.  It’s almost like it’s Groundhog Day -- except that today it actually is Groundhog Day, and they’re doing it again.  (Laughter.) 

	So I’m not really sure that qualifies as the contours of a proactive legislative agenda.  But it does put some pressure on Speaker Ryan, Leader McConnell, and other Republicans in Congress to lay out what it is exactly they support, and try to find some common ground with the administration.  We certainly have done that.  And we’ve made clear that some of the items that we have prioritized are things that they strongly support in their own right.  And hopefully we’re going to find willing partners on Capitol Hill to advance those measures.  I think that is certainly the expectation of most voters across the country.

	     Ayesha.

	     Q    So moving on to another topic.  Today some top U.S. generals told lawmakers at the Senate Armed Service Committee -- Armed Services Committee hearing that women should be required to register for the draft.  I was wondering, is that an official White House position at this point?  Does the President believe that women should be required to register for the draft?

	     MR. EARNEST:  It is not an official administration position. I believe that those military leaders were asked their personal opinion on that.  I didn’t see the exchange firsthand.  But there is no policy change to announce from here today.

	     Q    Are you considering it?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of how seriously this is being studied by the Department of Defense.  I know that there have been some members of Congress that have advocated for expanding Selective Service to include women registering, as well.  So I’ve seen those kinds of proposals floated, but I don't know how seriously that is being considered.  You might check with the Department of Defense to get a steer on it.

	     Q    On North Korea, they’ve notified some U.N. agencies that the country plans to launch a satellite later this month, and this could be an attempt to advance the country’s development of long-range missile technology.  How concerned is the White House about this latest announcement?  And does the international community -- does the U.S. need to move faster to get more sanctions on North Korea to kind of stop these actions that could be considered provocative?  Or is something more than sanctions needed?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the international community -- I feel confident in telling you that the international community would regard a step like that by the North Koreans as just another irresponsible provocation and a clear violation of their international obligations.

	     We have been working with the international community, both at the U.N. and with our allies and partners in the region, to confront North Korea for their destabilizing activities.  Just a few weeks ago they conducted a nuclear test that violated sort of their basic international obligations.  And carrying out a satellite launch like the one that has been discussed publicly would just be another destabilizing provocation on the part of the North Koreans.

	     And that's not just the view of the United States.  I feel confident in telling you that is a view that is shared by our partners at the United Nations Security Council and by our allies and partners in the region that had been seeking to stabilize and denuclearize the Korean Peninsula.

	     Q    But is there anything that can be done to stop these actions?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, the United States has worked closely not just with our allies in South Korea and Japan, but also with our partners in China and Russia, to convey to the North Koreans the need to end their provocative actions.

	     And there are a range of options that have been on the table.  And we certainly have, in our conversations at a diplomatic level with the Chinese in particular, encouraged them to continue to work with us and develop potential options.  And obviously China is in a unique position.  They have unique influence over the North Korean regime.  And we certainly are pleased to be able to work cooperatively and effectively with the Chinese to counter this threat.  And that work will continue.

	     We haven’t, at this point, announced any specific response to the North Korean nuclear test, but that certainly has been the subject of intense diplomacy over the last several weeks.  And once we have developed an appropriate response and are prepared to implement it with our allies and partners, then we’ll be prepared to talk about it with you then.

	     Mark.

	     Q    Josh, were you in the meeting with Ryan and McConnell?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I was not.

	     Q    So the readout you gave us was just based on what the agenda -- you knew the agenda to be?

	     MR. EARNEST:  And based on a conversation that somebody on my staff had with somebody who was in the meeting.

	     Q    Do you expect to be able to give us any more about the tone of the talks today?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Not at this point.  But if there’s more detail that we can dig out for you, we’ll look to do that.

	     Q    On another subject, yesterday the Treasury Department posted that the national debt topped $19 trillion -- $8.3 trillion of that was -- soared during President Obama’s watch.  Is this something that the President is concerned about as part of his legacy?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Mark, the measure that we are focused on is the percentage of debt to GDP.  And the best way for us to confront that is to actually start driving down the deficit as a percentage of GDP.  And under the President’s leadership, we have actually reduced that measure 75 percent because of this President’s commitment to fiscal responsibility.  And we have -- at least in fiscal year 2015 and in the last couple of years -- succeeded in driving the deficit-to-GDP ratio below 3 percent.  That is the measure that economists tell us over the long term will stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio, which is the statistic that we follow most closely.

	     And I think in the budget proposal that we’ll put forward, the longer-term vision that the President has is to continue to keep the debt at a relatively stable level as a percent of our GDP.

	     Q    My understanding is the debt is over 100 percent of GDP, that gross total debt at $19 trillion.  That's an enormous amount.  Do you believe that is sustainable?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think what we're seeking to do is to try to limit the growth of the debt as a percentage of GDP. And that's why we’ve been so focused on driving down the deficit. And that's why, frankly, the President is pretty proud of the success that we’ve had in reducing the deficit by 75 percent since he took office.

	     But this is certainly a measure that we're mindful of.  And look, to understand the long-term trends here we have to sort of take a look at what exactly happened.  When the last Democratic President was leaving office, he was passing off budget surpluses as far as the eye could see to his successor.  His successor inherited that strong fiscal position and proceeded to put in place tax cuts that predominantly benefit the wealthy and the well-connected, and launched a ground war in the Middle East -- all without paying for it.  And that also led to the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression that put enormous pressure on the federal budget. 

	And digging out of that economic downturn, leading our economy to recovery and doing it all in a fiscally responsible way will be a hallmark of the President’s legacy.

	     Q    The Congressional Budget Office projects a $100 billion increase in the deficit for FY17.  Is that something that corresponds with OMB’s projection?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t seen what OMB’s projections are, but we can certainly check with you on that.

	     Q    We get it Tuesday anyway.

	     MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I think it will be a part of the budget proposal that we’ll put forward.

	     Q    Thanks.

	     MR. EARNEST:  Ron.

	     Q    Back to Iowa.  You said how the winners of that were pessimistic, dark, all negative, so on and so forth.

	     MR. EARNEST:  I think others have made that observation, but I have, too.

	     Q    It also marked the rise of another candidate who is a young person who represents a different generation, who arguably has not been as dark and has been optimistic and sunny.  What’s the administration’s reaction to that, to Mr. Rubio?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, Mr. Rubio finished third and did so on the back of television ads saying that he no longer recognized his country.

	     So, look, it is difficult to differentiate among the messages from all of the candidates.  I think that people like Senator Rubio have felt an intense pressure to try to parrot the pessimism and darkness of the leading candidates on the Republican side.  And that does not position the party -- the Republican Party or the Republican Party nominee very well for a general election matchup in which they’ll be squaring off against a Democratic candidate that's committed to building on the progress that this country has made under President Obama’s leadership.

	     The Republicans will be offering up a candidate that is pessimistic about the future and committed to taking our country back to exactly the kinds of policies that got us into the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression in the first place.

	     So I think that's why -- again, I think that's why a lot of Democrats wake up feeling pretty good about our presidential prospects this morning.

	     Q    With the meeting, the Ryan-McConnell meeting, you said that the President had five things he wanted to highlight.  Did they have five things they wanted to highlight?  Or four things, or 10 things?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, for a readout of what they came to present, you should check with them.  The five things that I noted that were on the President’s agenda and that the President brought up in the meeting are things that Republicans themselves say that they support.  It doesn't mean we agree on every single aspect of them, but surely there is opportunity to find common ground when trying to fight heroin addiction or trying to cure cancer. 

	So you’d have to ask Republicans about what they're agenda is.  This was part of my response to Josh’s question.  It’s not really clear right now what their agenda is.  We certainly know what they're against.  We know they're against a health reform bill that has driven down the uninsured rate and driven down the growth in health care costs, to say nothing of the fact -- sort of alluding to Mark’s question -- repealing the Affordable Care Act would actually have a disastrous impact on the fiscal situation in this country.

	     So again, you’d have to talk to Republicans about what exactly it is they're trying to advance.

	     Q    So at this early read, there’s really -- you can't say anything more about where there might be some cooperation, an idea that they have that the President would run with?

	     MR. EARNEST:  All five of these are things that they say that they agree with.  All five of these are ideas that they had.

	     Q    In the past, but was that -- was there agreement on that?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, just to be blunt, out of respect for them, I’ll let them describe what they said in the meeting.  I’m not the spokesperson for Speaker Ryan or for Leader McConnell, and if they want to characterize their conversation with the President, then I’ll defer to them to do that.  All I can tell you is that the proactive agenda that the President put forward included these five things, which are five things that they say that they support. 

	Many of these are things that right now some of these Republican candidates who are on the campaign trail are actually trying to advance.  So, for example, fighting heroin addiction.  Why don't we lay the groundwork so that the next President has a running start in trying to address that specific challenge?

	     Q    On TPP, where are we technically in terms -- can they bring it up at any time?  Or are we still on a waiting -- just so I --

	     MR. EARNEST:  Yes,  it’s a complicated process.  We are not yet at a place where the President has forwarded the agreement to Congress for their ratification.

	     The signing ceremony for the Trans-Pacific Partnership I believe is actually scheduled for tomorrow in New Zealand.  This will be at the ministerial level.  The United States will officially agree to the agreement.  Part of the commitment that the President made was that we would give the American public ample opportunity to review the agreement before we signed it.  And so that will be taking place in New Zealand tomorrow.  After that, there are a couple of other steps before Congress has an opportunity to consider it. 

	So I’m not standing up here and suggesting that Congress should act tomorrow to pass the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  What I am saying is that once we go through this process and that there has been an opportunity for the public to carefully consider what’s included in the agreement, we’d like to see Congress act quickly on it.

	     Q    You must be aware that time -- where the line is that they have to act before or there’s not enough time.

	     MR. EARNEST:  I don't at this point have a specific time frame to lay out.  As this process moves farther, we’ll be able to characterize a little bit more clearly for you what the calendar would look like in terms of what sort of legislative steps would be required to ratify the agreement.

	     Margaret.

	     Q    Josh, do you have any more detail you can share with us about the President’s visit to this Islamic Society in Baltimore tomorrow?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President is certainly looking forward to his visit to this mosque in Baltimore.  The President will begin his visit by sitting down for a roundtable discussion with some leaders in the Muslim community.  And the President is looking for the opportunity to have some dialogue, to talk to leaders in the community about what’s on their minds, what their concerns are.  And the President is certainly looking forward to that discussion.

	     After that the President will have an opportunity to speak to a broader audience at the mosque, and it will be an opportunity to do a couple of things.  The first is to affirm the important role that Muslim Americans play in our society and to affirm our conviction in the principle of religious liberty, that law-abiding Americans should be able to worship God in the manner that they see fit, consistent with their religious heritage and traditions, in a way that doesn't subject them to either interference from the government or, frankly, divisive rhetoric on the campaign trail. 

	     And this is an important message, and the President is looking forward to delivering it.

	     Q    is this -- in this message, is it a recognition that the President thinks profiling and discrimination against Muslims is a problem right now?  It’s not theoretical, it’s a reality?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I’ll let the President’s words speak for themselves tomorrow.  I think the President has talked a lot about how important it is for the government to have an effective partnership with leaders in the Muslim community.  We know that there are extremist organizations like ISIL that are seeking to use social media to radicalize vulnerable members of the population.  And certainly the leaders in the Muslim community have a strong interest in preventing that from happening.

	     And we will have more success in our efforts to prevent that if we work effectively with the Muslim community to confront that threat, as opposed to branding everybody who attends a mosque as a potential enemy of the United States of America.  A, it’s not true; and, B, it’s going to be counterproductive to our efforts to fight extremists.

	     Q    So is this a personal appeal by the President to get Muslim leaders to help root out extremism when they see it in their own communities?  Is that a specific request from the President?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Look, I think the point that I’m making, and I’ve made before, and you'll hear the President make again tomorrow, is that we already see that that's what leaders in Muslim communities are doing; that we do see that there are Muslim leaders in communities all across the country who are concerned about the pernicious influence of the radical ISIL ideology and they are looking to protect their community from that.  And the U.S. government should work with them to do that.

	     But, look, I also don't want to leave you with the impression that the President’s remarks at the mosque are going to be focused on national security.  I think the President is quite interested in making sure that we're affirming the important role that Muslims play in our diverse American society, and certainly affirming their right to worship God in a way that's consistent with their heritage.  And they shouldn’t be subject to ridicule or targeting by anybody, let alone somebody who aspires to leading the country.

	     Q    Since this is the President’s first visit, do you expect anything to come out of it?  Are there proposals that the President is bringing, or is this just a conversation?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I wouldn't expect any policy proposals tomorrow.  But I would suspect that the President’s activities tomorrow will prompt exactly the kind of discussion and debate that the President thinks is worth having. 

	     Mike.

	     Q    Two topics.  This one first.  Can you talk a little bit about the buildup of kind of anger or frustration that the President has seemed to have on this topic of the rhetoric against Muslims, dating back -- I don't know -- at least to when he was on the trip to Turkey, and all of the stuff came up with the Syrian refugees, and he seemed very eager to repeatedly come back to this topic again.  Does it go back further than that?  And can you talk a little bit about what -- sort of how this appears to be kind of a culmination of that sort of finger-wagging at the Republicans and the candidates about the kind of rhetoric that he just feels very strongly about?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I think it is certainly true that we've seen an alarming willingness on the part of some Republicans to try to marginalize law-abiding, patriotic Muslim Americans.  And it is offensive.  It's not just offensive to the President.  I think it's certainly offensive to a lot of Muslim Americans.  I think it's just offensive to a lot of Americans who recognize that those kinds of cynical political tactics run directly contrary to the values that we hold dear in this country.  And I think the President is looking forward to the opportunity to make that point. 

	And again, we have seen a willingness on the part of leading Republican presidential candidates to try to appeal to people’s fears and anxieties, and they capitalized on terrorist attacks to do exactly that.  And it's unfortunate.  And I don't think that most Americans have had a particularly positive reaction about that.  And I think the President is looking forward to the opportunity to affirm the kinds of values that are broadly held in this country.

	Q    Quickly, a follow-up on that.  In Turkey when we were there, he didn’t limit it to a partisan attack against Republicans.  He was very frustrated with Democrats on Capitol Hill and in this country that were questioning the Syrian refugee program.  Are tomorrow’s comments limited just to Republicans?  Is it essentially a partisan critique that he’s prepared to make?

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, there’s no doubt that there are people in both parties who’ve gotten swept up -- or at least at the time, sort of got swept up in the furor around all of this.  But I think you’d be hard-pressed to make the case that Democrats have -- well, let me just say it this way.  It has been a transparent strategy on the part of Republicans to play on people’s anxieties, to target religious minorities to advance their political ambition.  And there have been some people who are not Republicans who have gotten a little swept up in that.  And the President was frustrated by that.  But there is no doubt that the cynical strategy that's been employed by some leading Republican candidates is a violation of our values that the President is most concerned about.

	Q    And just on the Paul Ryan and the meeting with Leader McConnell, I understand you want to talk about the things that were on the President’s agenda and you want to leave the reaction from the Republicans to their folks.  What was the President’s reaction to the things that they brought to the meeting?  What did he say?  What were the topics of conversation that were beyond the five things that he wanted to talk about, and what did he say about them?

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, again --

	Q    This isn't a question about what their comments were.

	MR. EARNEST:  You're being very clever, so I'll give you that up front.  I'm not going to have a whole lot more detail than this.  I can tell you that --

	Q    You don't want to talk about the topics that -- the other topics that were discussed?

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, because I want to be deferential to Leader McConnell and Speaker Ryan to describe their contribution to the meeting.  But I also didn’t sit in on the meeting, so the level of granular detail I can provide to you is limited. 

	The other thing that I can say that I didn’t mention in the first run at this is the President was pleased with the opportunity to sit down with them, and he was -- again, for all of the divisiveness and hateful rhetoric and pessimism and partisanship that we see on the campaign trail, it actually is possible for leading Republicans to sit down in the same office with a leading Democrat and have a conversation about the priorities of the country.  And it's not treasonous to do that.  In fact, it's part of the responsibility that goes along with leadership.

	And it certainly doesn’t mean they agreed on everything.  They didn’t.  But where there are areas of agreement --

	Q    You don't want to give an example of where they didn’t agree?  (Laughter.) 

	MR. EARNEST:  I don't.  But where they did agree, there is an obligation that both sides have to try to find that common ground.  And the President, in the year that [he] remains in office, is certainly committed to doing that.  And maybe it's easier for Republicans to do that, knowing that the President is not on the ballot.  Speaker Ryan said he was reminded of that today.  If that makes it easier for us to get some business done in Congress that's going to benefit the American people, then maybe we should hold the Iowa caucus every day.

	Mary.

	Q    On the list that you keep referencing for this meeting, you mentioned several times that trying to fight the heroin epidemic is something that seems to be an area of possible compromise.  But are there any signs that Congress is willing to allocate these new resources that the President is calling for?

	MR. EARNEST:  I didn’t see what sort of Republican reaction there has been to the budget proposal that we put forward today. But I'm confident that as the Congress undertakes the serious work that they have to undertake to pass a budget that the proposal that we put forward will be carefully considered.

	Again, oftentimes budgetary debates sort of break down along party lines, and I would acknowledge that things like investing in education is something that Democrats have traditionally supported and Republicans have been traditionally skeptical of that.  And we can have a debate about that, but that is sort of a traditionally partisan thing.  I do think that most Americans agree with Democrats on that, but that's another matter. 

	My point is, is there’s nothing inherently partisan about dedicating the kinds of resources that we have proposed to helping people who are suffering from heroin addiction.  And both parties recognize that there are long-term consequences not just for those individuals and not just for their families, but for the broader community.  And trying to address the root causes of some of that is an area where we’re hopeful we can find some common ground.

	     Q    And back on Iowa.  It now seems official, the AP has just declared Clinton the winner of the caucuses.  Any reaction? 

	     MR. EARNEST:  That’s a lot of responsibility, Josh, that the AP has.  (Laughter.)  This is an election that’s conducted by the Iowa Democratic Party, but yet it is the Associated Press who determines whether or not who won.

	     Q    I did not do it personally from my phone.  (Laughter.)

	     MR. EARNEST:  Oh, I was going to say that’s an impressive show of multitasking to sit there in the front row and count votes at the same time.

	     Listen, this is the first contest in what I expect will be a series of competitive ones.  And it was a spirited and close race in Iowa, and I suspect it’s not the last state where we say that.

	     Q    But no kind of congratulatory message?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I mean, obviously, Secretary Clinton has won, so congratulations to her.  But, look -- and I’m sure they feel good about that.  They should.  But this is -- Secretary Clinton, based on her 2008 experience, knows better than anybody that these kinds of contests -- or that the path to the Democratic nomination is a long one.  And she can -- again, based on her 2008 experience, she would tell you that the outcome in Iowa is not indicative of the outcome in New Hampshire.  So whether or not she came out on top in Iowa, I’m confident that she would be campaigning like an underdog in New Hampshire.

	     Q    And what do you make of how close it was?  I mean, it came down to three-tenths of a point.

	     MR. EARNEST:  Look, it’s a spirited debate.  And she clearly had a very sophisticated and effective turnout operation, and her field staff and her staff in Iowa I think should feel very good about the way their operation performed last night.  At the same time, it’s clear that Senator Sanders has, just in the space of a few months, inspired a passionate following.  And I think that’s a testament to his skills as a candidate.  It’s also a testament to the power of his message.  And he should feel pretty good about that.

	     I guess the one advantage I would say that he has is it’s easier to take that message to other states, and Secretary Clinton’s team are going to have to do the hard work of building a grassroots infrastructure in the states ahead.  So, look, it’s going to be a spirited competition.  I think all of that is good for the country, and it’s good for the democratic process.  I also think, as I mentioned to Josh, I do expect that it will eventually be good for the Democratic nominee.

	     Michelle.

	     Q    Secretary Clinton got lots of attention from one of her emails where she called the caucus process “a creature of the extremes of both parties.”  So would you say that the results last night exemplified that?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think it’s a difficult thing for me to comment on because, based on my own experience, I have a different sort of assessment of the caucus process.  There is no denying that because of the impediments to participating in the caucus, you don’t just sort of show up in a 12-hour window and cast a secret ballot -- at least on the Democratic side.  It requires more of a sustained commitment to the process and to the party.

	    

	So does that mean that you’re much more likely to have partisans participating in the process?  It definitely does.  But, look, everybody knows the rules on the front end.  It’s not as if it was -- that it was a surprise to anybody who is participating in the caucuses exactly what the rules were going to be.  And this is the kind of competition, again, that serves to hone the organizing skills of a particular campaign.  It certainly hones the skills of candidates who are put to the test of participating in town hall meetings and forums and living room conversations for months on end.  It’s a grueling process.  But, ultimately, it’s one that reflects something important about our democracy. 

	These are Iowans in both parties who are participating in essentially community-run, self-run events to organize, cast ballots, and have them counted.  So there are parts of it that are a little anachronistic, but it also is a pretty pure form of the kind of democratic ideals that are pretty important to the strength of our democracy.

	     Q    And the extreme closeness of the Democratic race, and Ted Cruz coming out on top -- was that surprising to the White House?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I wasn’t particularly surprised.  Traditionally, in Iowa -- again, I don’t know what everybody at the White House thought, but traditionally, at least in recent history, those on the Republican side, those candidates that had demonstrated the most success in building support in the evangelical community in Iowa had ended up winning the Iowa caucuses.  That was true of Senator Santorum in 2012.  It was certainly true of Governor Huckabee in 2008.  And knowing how hard Senator Cruz had worked to build support in that community in Iowa, I know that wasn’t what the polls say, but I wasn’t particularly surprised by the outcome.

	     Q    When you look at each side, isn’t this kind of a perfect example, though, of the extremes of both parties in this particular contest?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I don’t know.  I think it’s hard to say.  I don’t think that -- I did have the chance to watch some of the C-SPAN coverage of a couple of the polling locations -- caucus locations yesterday.  And the process is not always clean and efficient, but I don’t think everybody that I saw on camera, at least, was an extremist.  (Laughter.)

	     Q    You can tell by looking?

	     MR. EARNEST:  It seemed to me that most people were committed to participating in a democratic process, both on the Republican and Democratic side.  And, again, I’ve seen some news coverage of that email from Secretary Clinton.  My experience in the caucuses has just been different.

	     Q    Okay.  And do you know if the President watched any of the results coming in last night?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t spoken to him this morning, so I don’t know how much he watched.  I’m confident that he has read a lot of the coverage of the results, though.

	     Q    Okay.  And Speaker Ryan did put out -- his office put out a note this morning criticizing what the President wants to do with his budget.  It’s not that that was unexpected, but what does that mean for some of these really specific elements that the President wants to fund for the upcoming year?  Even some of the ones where you say there’s a lot of bipartisan support, but hearing that from Speaker Ryan, it doesn’t exactly sound too optimistic overall.

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, budgets are always -- particularly in an era of divided government -- are always an exercise in compromise.  And that’s certainly been true the last couple of years.  And I would anticipate that if we can reach a budget agreement this year, that the same will be true.

	     There will be some budget priorities that Speaker Ryan is able to advance in the context of the budget, and hopefully, there will be some priorities that we’ll be able to advance, too. And if we strike that compromise in the right place, I think it would be a good thing for the country and I think it will attract the support that’s necessary to be passed by the Congress and signed into law by the President.

	     Q    Among those priorities, even when the President met with the Democratic leadership and afterwards you laid out what those priorities were, Gitmo was never mentioned, even though in other venues you talk about that being a major priority.  And you’ve laid out that the plan is going to save money.  All of the virtues of this plan you’ve laid out.  But by never mentioning it as something that the President can work with Republicans on, are you essentially saying that there’s no chance of that going anywhere?

	     MR. EARNEST:  No, I think what I’ve tried to do is to lay out the areas where a bipartisan agreement is likely -- in some cases, blatantly obvious -- and that’s a good thing.  When it comes to closing the prison at Guantanamo Bay, not many members of Congress share that priority.  And that’s unfortunate, but it’s certainly not going to stop us from making the case that doing so would be good for our national security and would be good for our country’s fiscal situation.

	     Isaac.

	     Q    So did the President lay out any desire for the TPP vote to happen before the lame duck session?  Was that part of the conversation at all?  You talked about the calendar and the immediate, but what’s his take in the meeting, or what’s the White House’s take?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I think there was a general discussion about timing for considering congressional votes on the Trans-Pacific Partnership.  We’re obviously not there yet because there are some additional steps that this agreement has to go through before it can be presented to Congress.  But we haven’t laid out any firm deadlines at this point.  We’ve just made the case that it would be good for the country and our economy for the Trans-Pacific Partnership to be approved by Congress as soon as possible.  The good news is, it’s not just the White House that shares that view.  Other organizations like the Chamber of Commerce and the Farm Bureau, who are strong supporters of Republican causes, who share that view.

	     Q    So, ideally, would you want this passed before the lame duck session, before the election, or vote to happen --

	     MR. EARNEST:  I mean, we’re obviously going to have to work with Speaker Ryan and Leader McConnell on that.  We haven’t set out any firm timing deadlines at this point, but we certainly would have a bias toward earlier action from Congress.

	     Q    The Republicans would say that what’s going on with this meeting and the stuff that you’ve laid out is that it’s an old game from you guys, that you sort of beat them up for being obstructionists, and then use it for political gain. 

	     MR. EARNEST:  Prove us wrong.  Prove us wrong.  Do it.  Just do the five things then.  Take that argument off the table.

	     Q    So if the Republicans were to pass TPP and criminal justice reform, then you think that the Republican majority should be reelected?

	     MR. EARNEST:  No, certainly not.  (Laughter.)  But I think Republicans would certainly have a stronger case to make to the American electorate that they should be able to retain the majority if they can actually point to something that they’ve done in the last year other than vote to repeal Obamacare. 

	They’ll probably queue up four or five more of those votes, but that’s not doing anybody any good.  That’s not helping any Republicans do anything.  It’s not helping anybody find a job.  It’s not strengthening our economy.  It certainly isn’t strengthening the security of the country.  It’s not helping anybody get access to health care.  It’s not improving our fiscal situation.  So what are Republicans doing to address those challenges?  The President has got some good ideas of where we can work with Republicans to do that, but we haven’t actually seen anything from Republicans about that.  If anything, we see comments from people like Tom Cotton who suggest that even bipartisan agreements should be torpedoed somehow.

	     Q    But you guys think that the Republicans should be voted out of office, whatever they do on these agenda items, right?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, ultimately, what we believe is that Republicans should work with the President on at least these five areas because it’s good for the country for them to do so and because they say that they support these things.  So if you accept that being elected to Congress means that you have some sort of responsibility to try to take the country a better, stronger, healthier, more prosperous place, then this should be a good place to start. 

	We can have vigorous debates about a bunch of other things that Republicans should do.  We believe they should vote to raise the minimum wage.  But we can at least start, as a practical matter, by focusing on areas where we know there is agreement, and where there is bipartisan agreement that this kind of progress would be good for the country. 

	Again, I’m not suggesting that Republicans need any sort of electoral advice from me -- Republicans in Congress have done just fine in elections by ignoring me.  But my point is that in November, incumbents are going to be on the campaign trail making the case to their constituents about why they should be reelected.  Why not go on the campaign trail and say that you should be reelected because you are helping communities across the country fight heroin addiction; because we’re going to approve the Trans-Pacific Partnership and cut taxes on 18,000 American goods that are imposed by other countries; or that we’re going to make a historic investment in curing cancer?  Those are the kinds of things that -- again, whether you’re a Democrat or a Republican, those are the kinds of credentials that are going to enhance anybody’s prospects for reelection.

	     Scott.

	     Q    Josh, you had previously listed seven things where there might be common ground -- AUMF and EITC.  Did the President take those off the list today?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Those continue to be strong priorities that we support.

	     Q    Saving those for lunch?  (Laughter.)

	     MR. EARNEST:  Exactly.  We’ll save those for a follow-up meeting maybe.  Those continue to be items on our agenda.  Obviously, the deal with the AUMF is that this is something that they’ve actually talked about in a number of other meetings.  And there have been -- it’s no secret that there have been some staff-level discussions about this as well.  And the truth is, it also might be a little harder to find some bipartisan common ground on this one.  So they didn’t spend a lot of time on that in the meeting.

	     The EITC thing -- our view on the EITC proposal is pretty well known.  I don’t think it’s a surprise to either leader that this is something that the President advocates.  It just wasn’t on the agenda today.

	     Q    And just to be clear, on Selective Service.  Is the administration against expanding it to women, or you’ve just got to wait and see until the Pentagon --

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ll be honest, I was informed of this congressional exchange shortly before I walked out here.  I’m not aware of any rigorous policy process that’s underway to consider changing that policy.  But let me take a look and see if there’s additional information on this I can provide to you.  I can just tell you that right now, our policy on this has not changed.

	     Toluse.

	     Q    Thanks, Josh.  You mentioned Puerto Rico first.  I’m wondering if the ordering of the list, of the agenda is an indication of how important and how much the President pushes those things.

	     MR. EARNEST:  It’s not.  They’re not in any order.  The reason I noted Puerto Rico first is just to underscore the commitment that the House had made and Speaker Ryan had made to take action on giving the leaders of Puerto Rico greater restructuring authority early in this calendar year.  And so I guess in some ways it’s in chronological order in which we hope they’ll take action, but it’s not a reflection of our priorities. All of these things are important.

	     Q    And did you get any sense from Leader McConnell that he also would move on this quickly?  Because it does seem like there’s a timeline with Puerto Rico sort of having the clock ticking on them in terms of their finances.

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, the situation in Puerto Rico is certainly urgent, and obviously Secretary Lew has spent quite a bit of time working on this, even traveling down to Puerto Rico just a couple weeks ago to have additional conversations on this. You’d have to ask Leader McConnell about any commitments he’s prepared to make about timing for Senate consideration of that kind of legislation.

	     Q    And Speaker Ryan, on a number of different occasions -- I don’t know if it came up at the meeting -- has said that one of the top things he wants from the President is for the President to lay out a plan for how to defeat ISIS.  I know you guys have talked about this regularly, but it doesn’t seem like he’s satisfied with whatever plan that you all have put out.  So I’m wondering --

	     MR. EARNEST:  But he hasn’t proposed an alternative, and he actually hasn’t demonstrated yet a willingness to actually have members of Congress do the one thing that they’re supposed to do, which is vote to authorize the use of military force against ISIL.  So that’s why I guess I’m not particularly compelled by his rhetoric on this.

	     Q    And the Defense Secretary today laid out some information about how much more money they want to spend on the budget request for this upcoming year on counterterrorism and on defeating ISIS.  I’m wondering if you could talk about specifically what you hope to achieve with the extra money.

	     MR. EARNEST:  That will be part of the budget rollout that we’ll do next week, so we’ll have more details on that.  But the one component of the Defense budget that the Defense Department talked about in a little bit more detail was the European Reassurance Initiative funding that we’re seeking in this budget. And this would be money that would be used to strengthen and deepen our coordination with our NATO allies.

	And we have asked our NATO allies to ramp up the kind of financial commitment that they make to their national security and to our collective defense as NATO allies.  And one way I think we can signal that being a priority is to ramp up our own commitment to those efforts.  And that’s exactly what this budget proposal would do.  But Secretary Carter I think talked about that in a little bit more detail today. 

	     As it relates to ISIL, we’ll have more on that next week.

	     Q    Just one more on Afghanistan.  A suicide bomber in a suicide bomb attack this morning or yesterday killed about 20 different policemen and we’ve been hearing about increasingly growing numbers of casualties among the Afghan security forces.  The President’s plan says that we would draw down U.S. troops from 9,800 to about 5,500 by the end of this year.  But it does seem like the Afghan security forces are really struggling and taking on more casualties, so I’m wondering if the White House is reconsidering that timeline, and whether or not you may end up having to change that timeline once again.

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, Toluse, let me start by just condemning in no uncertain terms this act of violence that occurred in Afghanistan yesterday.  It did target police officers -- or it appeared to target police officers who are just trying to keep the peace in their city and in their country.  And obviously our thoughts and prayers are with the families of those who were killed in this attack.

	     More generally, I think this is just the latest illustration of how Afghanistan continues to be a dangerous place.  And the security challenges in that country are significant, particularly when you consider an attack like this on police officers. 

	     What the administration, what the United States and our NATO allies have committed to do is to standing with the Afghan people and the Afghan national security forces as they take full responsibility for the security situation in their own country.  That was a responsibility that they assumed a little over a year ago, and it has proved to be a challenging task.  Afghanistan is a big country, and there are extremists with a lot of skill that have sought to take the fight to those security forces.  But what we have seen is a willingness on the part of those security forces, even when sustaining losses, to fight for their country.

	And I cited the example of Kunduz last week, I believe, where you saw extremists overrun Afghan national security forces that were protecting the city of Kunduz and Afghan forces were forced to flee the city.  But what they did was they reorganized and acted quickly, with the support of the United States and our NATO allies, to within a couple of weeks, retake the city. 

	So that is an indication of a couple of things.  One is, it’s an indication that additional training and equipping of Afghan national security forces is needed.  And that is the first pillar of the ongoing mission of U.S. troops and NATO troops that are still in Afghanistan.  But the second thing it illustrates is that it illustrates the commitment that the Afghan national security forces have to fighting for their country.  And that’s a good thing, and that bodes well for their long-term ability to fight extremists and eventually secure their country.

	     Q    It sounds like you think that the timeline for now is the same.  No plans to change that.

	     MR. EARNEST:  At this point, I don’t have any policy changes to announce.

	     Kevin.

	     Q    Thanks, Josh.  To the best of your knowledge, has the President ever had a 50-point lead in a poll in a race?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Off the top of my head, no.

	     Q    Has he ever lost a 50-point lead in a race, to the best of your knowledge?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Not that I know of.

	     Q    Has he ever, in your memory, been involved in a race where he led the group by 50 points plus, and then finally on Election Day -- in this case, caucus day -- squeaks by, by less than 1 percent?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, now that we’re talking about this, I do think that -- I don’t know if it’s 50 points, but I know that there was some pretty pessimistic polling the first time the President decided to run for the United States Senate.  He was mired at the bottom in the very low single digits in that race, and he did, eventually, prevail. 

	     Obviously, he faced some long odds the first time that he ran for President in 2007 and 2008.  But even at that time, we had encouraged people to not focus on the national polls but actually to consider the President’s prospects in the early states because that was going to be part and parcel of our strategy.

	     Q    But he hadn’t been in national public service for more than two decades when this happened.  And so doesn’t it speak to the weakness of the Clinton campaign to have barely squeaked by against a socialist in the caucuses?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Kevin, I think what is clear is that there is a robust and vigorous campaign in store for Democrats in this presidential campaign.  And that’s a good thing for our democracy.  It’s a good for a country, and it’s ultimately going to be good for the Democratic Party.  The skills of the Democratic nominees are going to be honed and improved in the context of a vigorous debate.  We’re going to see Democratic campaigns go from state to state, building up operations and exciting and inspiring and energizing their supporters.  And as we saw in 2008, that is going to have benefits for Democrats in the general election in 2016. 

	So I don’t know how long this Democratic nomination process is going to take, but I think everybody has always expected that it would go beyond the early states.  How far beyond I think is the key question.  But if it goes far beyond those early states, that’s not necessarily a bad thing for Democrats -- in fact, it was a really good thing for Democrats in 2008.

	     Q    Okay, broadly, maybe for Democrats.  But if you’re in the Clinton camp today, are you doing a dance, or are you worried, looking over your shoulder, that objects in the mirror may be closer than they appear?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think Secretary Clinton herself said last night that she was breathing a sigh of relief.  So that generally means that they’re feeling pretty good.  And, again, I think the other thing that they remember well is that New Hampshire primary from 2008, where even after sustaining a pretty significant defeat in Iowa in 2008 --

	     Q    Third-place finish.

	     MR. EARNEST:  -- a third-place finish, that Secretary Clinton emerged victorious in New Hampshire.  Now, I’m not following the race close enough to know whether or not something like that is possible this time around, but I think it is an indication that both candidates are going to be campaigning hard in New Hampshire.  And if they don’t, there’s some risk associated with that.

	     Q    Just a couple more.  On women in the military, you would agree and acknowledge that they serve honorably and well.  You would agree that they are entitled to every opportunity that any other servicemember should be entitled to.

	     MR. EARNEST:  Yes.  And you know the Secretary of Defense has recently announced a policy decision that would open up combat positions to women inside the military, too.  So this certainly is a principle that is on display not just in terms of the President’s rhetoric but in terms of some of the policies that we’ve implemented that we believe will enhance and strengthen our national security.

	     Q    Then why not equal treatment in Selective Service?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I just don’t know if this is a policy decision that’s being carefully --

	     Q    Broadly speaking, is it a good idea, do you think?  Do you think the President might back something like that?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I’ll acknowledge I don’t know sort of the pros and cons of advancing a policy like this, but we can look into it for you.

	     Q    Okay.  Lastly, on the economy and the deficit.  You mentioned that -- or Mark mentioned the debt earlier.  An enormous number.  And then you came back and talked about the deficit and how you cut it down I think 75 percent is the number that you used. 

	     MR. EARNEST:  Correct.

	     Q    And yet, you’ve also acknowledged, or at least the CBO is suggesting that the deficit will, in fact, increase in 2016.  Do you acknowledge that is what will likely happen?  And if that is the case, is the President’s economic plan still working?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, let’s go through a couple of these things.  I’m wary of conceding that the early projections on the deficit are going to be right because they’re usually wrong.  So I think that’s the first thing.  The second thing is we’ll have some updated data that we’ll be able to produce in the context of our budget rollout next Tuesday, a week from today.  We’ll be able to discuss some of the projections that we see as most likely in the future. 

	The third thing is the reason that the CBO made the change in their deficit projection was principally driven by the agreement to cut so many taxes at the end of last year and to make permanent some of those business tax cuts, not all of which we supported, but is part and parcel of a compromise budget agreement.  So I certainly do think that it merits asking Republicans -- who do believe with such conviction that the size of the debt and the deficit is a problem -- why they believe it is appropriate to pass and make permanent business tax cuts without paying for them.

	     Q    Okay, last one then.  On the meetings today -- and I know we’ll probably get a bit of a readout from the Leader hopefully and from the Speaker as well -- did the President go into this meeting expecting something substantive to come out of it other than an exchange of ideas?  Or should we all expect that sometime in the next week or so, even shorter time period, that something concrete will be announced?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I wouldn’t expect -- our expectation going into this meeting was not that any specific policy announcements would be made coming out of it.  But I do think that the hope is that by having conversations among these three leaders in government, that it can lay the groundwork for effective progress on shared priorities in the future and hopefully a discussion about, for example, investing in a cure for cancer among the Speaker of the House, the Leader of the Senate, and the President of the United States -- that they can lay the groundwork for effective bipartisan discussions moving forward to try to find a budget compromise around those kinds of investments. 

	And so, no, I wouldn’t expect any sort of immediate announcement, but we are hopeful that it can lay the groundwork for some progress in the future.

	     George.

	     Q    Two follows on the Baltimore visit.  You put it in the context of the ongoing political campaign.  Is it fair to say that the scheduling of it for now, after seven years of requests by the community, is driven by the President’s desire to partake in that debate?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think as Mike pointed out, the President was a pretty robust participant in that debate over the fall.  But I certainly think this is an opportunity in the eyes of the President to send a clear signal to the Muslim American community that the President of the United States is going to firmly defend your right in this country to worship God consistent with your tradition and your heritage.  That is a founding principle of our democracy.  It is part of what makes America the greatest country in the world.  And it’s unfortunate that some people might perceive our commitment to those values cheapened by cynical political tactics from some Republicans.  The President is not going to stand for that, and I think his appearance at the mosque tomorrow will make clear his commitment to our nation’s founding principles.

	     Q    But he’s not just sending a message to Muslim Americans.  He’s sending a message to other Americans, too.

	     MR. EARNEST:  I would anticipate that other Americans will make note of his visit and I won’t be surprised if that arouses some controversy.  But, look, this is a debate that the President welcomes.  And so tune in tomorrow.  It will be interesting. 

	     Q    Can we expect him to specifically mention the Republican debate?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I wouldn’t expect any of the candidates tomorrow to enjoy the benefit of being singled out by the President of the United States.  But I think the President will  -- look, I think the fact that this visit is taking place in the current political context is obvious to everyone.  So even a subtle reference will be immediately recognizable to all of you that are such close observers of the President’s speeches.

	     Dave.

	     Q    Josh, thanks.  The European Reassurance Fund that you mentioned a little while ago -- first of all, did the President bring that up today in the meeting?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I don't know if that was something that came up.  It certainly was not the focus of a lot of discussion in the meeting.  But you’d have to ask Speaker Ryan and Leader McConnell.  I would hazard a guess that this would be the kind of investment that those two gentlemen would support.  But you should check with them to confirm that.

	     Q    And I know you've been pretty up front over the last several months about the fact that sanctions against Russia have not been changing Putin’s mind about Ukraine and so on.

	     MR. EARNEST:  Certainly not to the degree that we would like to see.

	     Q    So is this proposal to quadruple the funding in this program to reassure NATO allies, is that another indication that diplomacy is not working with Putin?

	     MR. EARNEST:  No, I wouldn’t read it that way.  I think it is an indication that the United States values deeply the strength of our alliance in NATO, and we are investing in that alliance in a way that will have important national security benefits not just for the United States for also for our allies in Europe.

	     And we're doing that in part to send a clear signal to our NATO allies that we're committed to their defense, but also as a signal that they should be making a similarly serious commitment to enhancing their national security and investing in their national security capacity -- both because it will enhance the national security of that country, but also of our alliance.

	     And there’s no better way to do that and to send the clear signal that we believe that those kinds of investments should be a priority than to go ahead and make that kind of investment ourselves.  And that's the signal that we're hoping to send.

	     Q    What does the White House expect that Putin’s response will be?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I have no idea what his response will be.  I think he prides himself on being a little unpredictable.  And so I’m not even sure if he will determine that such an announcement merits a response.  But if he does, I’m sure he will make sure that we're all aware of it.  

	     Yes, ma’am, in the back.  I’ll give you the last one.  Yes.

	     Q    Hi, Josh.  Thanks.

	     MR. EARNEST:  Hi, there.

	     Q    Hi.  Just a couple quick questions.  One, I just want to go through the TPP tomorrow.  It’s being signed in New Zealand tomorrow.

	     MR. EARNEST:  That's correct.

	     Q    And yet it still has to go through its process here, which, of course, is not fully understood in New Zealand and the countries outside of America.

	     MR. EARNEST:  There are plenty of people in America that don't entirely understand that process.  You might even include me in that category.

	     Q    Worst-case scenario, Congress doesn't pass it.  The public throws their arms up in the air.  What then happens to that agreement that they’ve signed in New Zealand?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, listen, I don't expect that that's what’s going to happen.  There is strong bipartisan support in the United States Congress for a Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement that achieves the goals that we achieved in the context of this agreement.  So we're bullish about the prospects for completing this agreement and we're certainly going to make the case to Congress that they should act as quickly as possible on this.

	But the good news is, is it’s not just going to the Democratic President trying to appeal to Republicans in Congress to support this agreement.  We're going to be relying on the United States Chamber of Commerce, the American Farm Bureau, National Association of Manufacturers and other Republican-friendly organizations to make a strong case to the Republicans that they work closely with to support this agreement.

	     So we’ve got a strong case, and we’ll be making it pretty aggressively.  I’ll also note that because of the successful passage of the Trade Promotion Authority legislation last year, we see a couple of things.  One is there is a clear sort of outline for a strategy for getting this passed.  The Trade Promotion Authority legislation was designed around this idea of getting Republicans to vote for authority that the Democratic President could use to negotiate the agreement.  That's a pretty tough sell among Republicans.  Our sell this time is much clearer.  Right now we’ve got 18,000 American goods that are facing taxes that are imposed by other countries and we believe we should cut those taxes.  Republicans like cutting taxes.  They surely like cutting taxes that other countries unfairly put on American products.  So we’ve got a stronger case.

	     The other thing is that because of Trade Promotion Authority, at least in the United States Senate, we don't have to worry about the 60-vote filibuster threshold.  And that should also make it at least lower the bar for congressional passage of this approval legislation.

	     Q    Right, so Asia and Australia and New Zealand can be confident that this is actually going to go through at some point?

	     MR. EARNEST:  Well, we're confident that we’ll get it done.  And so hopefully they will be, too. 

	     All right.  Thanks very -- you had one more?

	     Q    One more question on the Zika virus.  It’s been discovered that this is possibly as a result of 500,000 mosquitoes being genetically engineered mosquitoes being released in the Amazon as a result of actually American testing and experimentation by companies, such as Bill Gates’s.  Would there ever be any accountability in that situation?  Does the White House think there should be any accountability to organizations who are releasing genetically modified insects without in this case failing to observe or acknowledge what could happen without antibiotics?

	     MR. EARNEST:  I have to admit I have not seen the news report that you're citing.  I think what I can say about this is it is clear there is a lot more that needs to be learned about the science behind this disease.  There are still questions that are being raised about the precise linkage between the Zika virus and this particular birth defect.  There are questions that are raised about how closely those two things are actually related.  And that will have consequences for what steps we can take to try to fight this disease. 

	So there’s a lot more that needs to be learned.  In fact, this is why the CDC and others have devoted so many resources to trying to study this disease, to try to interview those individuals that have suffered sort of the worst impacts that we're quite -- most concerned about.  And so the more that we learn will inform our ability both to protect the American people here at home, but also to make sure that something like this, if we can prevent it -- keep it from happening again. 

	     Q    The report that actually came out that (inaudible) in Brazil, I think -- they did a study that they released in 2015, and it was directly related to genetically engineered mosquitos.

	     MR. EARNEST:  The President spoke to President Rousseff earlier this week, where they talked about -- or maybe it was last week -- where they talked about how we could coordinate our efforts to fight this disease.  And so we’re certainly going to stay in touch with them moving forward.

	     Thanks a lot, everybody.

	                             END           2:07 P.M. EST

	The President spoke by phone today with Prime Minister David Cameron of the United Kingdom to discuss Syria and the upcoming London Conference on Supporting Syria and the Region, which the Prime Minister will co-host with other world leaders on February 4.  President Obama reiterated the commitment of the United States to continue to support those displaced by the violence in Syria and elsewhere in the region, as well as to help alleviate the pressures in Europe created by the unprecedented inflow of refugees.  He informed the Prime Minister that the United States will be represented at the Conference by Secretary of State John Kerry, who will announce significant new contributions to support relief efforts, and discussed plans relating to the Refugee Summit he will host at the UN General Assembly in September.  The two leaders also conferred over the situation in Syria and the need for concrete steps to improve humanitarian access and build confidence in support of the political process.  Finally, they noted ongoing efforts to resolve the political impasse in Libya, and Prime Minister Cameron updated President Obama on his negotiations with European Union leaders to reform the United Kingdom's membership in the European Union.  The President reaffirmed continued U.S. support for a strong United Kingdom in a strong European Union.

	Via Telephone

	2:14 P.M. EST
	 
	MR. PRICE:  Good afternoon, everyone, and thanks for joining today’s call.  We wanted to offer a preview of the visit later this week of Colombian President Santos.  To do that, we have three senior administration officials on this call.  First, a bit on the ground rules.  This call is on the record, but it will be embargoed until the conclusion of the call, so we’d ask that you not tweet or otherwise use this information until the call concludes.
	 
	As I said, we have three senior administration officials on the call.  We have NSC Senior Director for Western Hemisphere Affairs, Mark Feierstein.  We have Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs, Roberta Jacobson.  And we have the Special Envoy to the Colombia Peace Process, Bernard Aronson. 
	 
	And so with that, I will turn it over to Mark, with a reminder that this is embargoed until its conclusion, but on the record.
	 
	MR. FEIERSTEIN:  Great.  Thank you very much, Ned.  I’ll jump in with a few comments on President Santos’s visit to Washington, D.C., and I’ll speak a bit to the schedule and the themes for the visit.
	 
	The visit recognizes one of the premier foreign policy successes for the United States in recent years, and sets the stage for continued U.S. support for Colombia.  On the morning of February 4th, Vice President Biden will host President Santos and members of the delegation for a private breakfast at the Naval Observatory.  A number of U.S. senators will also be in attendance.  The purpose will be to discuss the status of the Colombian Peace Process and the future of our support for Colombia. 
	 
	In the afternoon of February 4th, President Obama will meet with President Santos in the Oval Office to discuss the latest developments in the peace negotiations and ways the United States can support Colombia in a post-peace accord era. 
	 
	On their meeting, the two Presidents will attend a reception commemorating the 15-year anniversary of Plan Colombia.  Current and former U.S. and Colombian officials who contributed to the success of Plan Colombia will be in attendance as will a bipartisan group with members of Congress and NGO representatives.  President Obama and President Santos will deliver remarks, which will be open to the press.
	 
	On February 5th, Secretary Kerry will host a working lunch for President Santos and his delegation at the State Department.  The Secretary will be joined by the leaders of U.S. departments and agencies involved in bilateral cooperation with Colombia.  Santos will be accompanied by several of his Cabinet members.  The delegations will discuss the peace process and future U.S. assistance to Colombia in the event of a peace accord.  I know Roberta will have more to say about this later.
	 
	These multiple high-level engagements with the administration reflect the scope of our bilateral relationship, which is among the most robust in Latin America, or really anywhere around the world.  That relationship has been symbolized over the past 15 years by Plan Colombia.  U.S. assistance helped Colombia transform itself over the past 15 years into a more secure, more prosperous and more peaceful democracy with a vibrant free-market economy. 
	 
	Plan Colombia worked for three principal reasons:  It had strong bipartisan support in the U.S. Congress; the support was sustained over time; and we had a capable Colombian partner with a political will to make tough decisions, and that invested their own country’s resources. 
	 
	The United States supports Colombia’s efforts today to negotiate a just and lasting peace accord with the FARC.  In February of 2015, President Obama and Secretary Kerry appointed Bernie Aronson as U.S. Special Envoy to the Colombia Peace Process.  Special Envoy Aronson has consulted regularly with the Colombian government and FARC negotiators to facilitate negotiations, and he will give you a fuller update on the peace negotiations later in the call.
	 
	And as I noted, sustained bipartisan support has been a cornerstone of our success in Colombia, and the United States plans to continue to stand by the country.  We’re aware of the potential needs for assistance in the event of a peace agreement, and our foreign assistance request to Congress in the FY17 budget will represent an increase over previous years.  This request will demonstrate our intention to help Colombia successfully implement its peace agreement.
	 
	And finally, I’ll just note that this visit -- I put this visit in the context of the President’s broader engagement with the hemisphere.  Of course, we continue to pursue a normalization process with Cuba.  We have received $250 million from Congress in our FY16 budget to invest in Central America to get at the root causes of migration by combatting poverty and violence. 
	 
	On March 10th, the President will host Prime Minister Trudeau of Canada for an official visit and state dinner.  We expect in a few months to hold a North American Leaders Summit meeting in which the President will have an opportunity to meet with his counterparts from Canada and Mexico. 
	 
	And finally, later this year, the President will travel to Peru for the meeting of APEC.  So it’s a very, very busy year for the President and the entire administration.
	 
	And with that, I’ll defer to my colleagues.
	 
	MS. JACOBSON:  Thank you, Mark.  And what I’d like to do is just say a couple of words about the relationship with Colombia, the bilateral relationship, and the way that it has really expanded and deepened over the last few years, before we move on to the peace process as we prepare for President Santos’s visit.
	 
	As Mark Feierstein noted, the U.S. and Colombia have so many objectives that they share in the Western Hemisphere and really beyond, which obviously focuses on things like transnational organized crime and narcotics trafficking, as well as promoting professional and accountable security forces.  But it goes beyond that to include promoting rules-based free trade and investments, and combatting climate change.  Mark mentioned that the administration plans to request increased bilateral assistance to support Colombia’s efforts to implement a peace accord as part of the strategy that refocuses our engagement. 
	 
	This will focus on three broad pillars, which I think Special Envoy Aronson will talk more about.  It will focus on security, including counternarcotics, demobilization of FARC fighters and demining, expanding the state presence in public institutions and strengthening those.  And it will focus on justice and assistance for victims of the conflict.
	 
	We’ve seen enormous progress in Colombia.  And the partnership with Colombia has shown results outside of that country, as well, through our investments.  The U.S.-Colombia Action Plan on Regional Security Cooperation has resulted in the Colombian National Police training roughly 26,500 security personnel from 61 countries.  But what I want to emphasize in particular is the role that the Colombian National Police has played in Central America, where they have been crucial trainers and mentors to those security forces.
	 
	But we’re now moving into other areas and broadening our bilateral relationship as well, and that is reflected in a new process that was launched by President Obama and Santos in 2010, which is called the High-Level Partnership Dialogue that has now completed four rounds of discussion headed by Secretary Kerry and Foreign Minister Holguín, and focuses on issues such as human rights, economic and social empowerment, energy, environmental protection, education and culture, as well as other issues that involves other agencies of the U.S. government.
	 
	Moving forward, we are going to continue to work with the Colombian government on issues such as education, which is such an important priority for both President Obama, through his 100,000 Strong in the Americas initiative, and President Santos.  Most recently, there were seven grants to Colombian institutions that were made through 100,000 Strong in the Americas program on December 14th.  We also have a very important bilateral initiative that’s been in effect for the last few years; it’s called the U.S.-Colombia Action Plan on Racial and Ethnic Equality, which has been crucial to focus on issues of Afro-Colombians and the indigenous as we each seek to make the programs much more inclusive -- something that will be aided greatly by peace in Colombia.
	 
	We also have seen enormous results from the U.S.-Colombia Trade Promotion Agreement, or the Free Trade Agreement that was signed in 2012.  The U.S. is Colombia’s largest trading partner, representing 25.6 percent of Colombia’s exports and 28.4 percent of its imports. 
	 
	We think that Colombia has made progress on human rights, but we know that serious issues remain.  There are threats and attacks against human rights defenders, and progress in combatting impunity for conflict-related abuses continues to be a challenge there.  And vulnerable populations, as I mentioned before -- some of them Afro-Colombian or indigenous, others rural areas or women -- are disproportionately affected by violence, poverty, and displacement.  So we continue to consult regularly with the Colombian government and nongovernmental organizations to work on those issues.
	 
	But let me close by just mentioning a couple of things that we have worked with Colombia on outside of the bilateral relationship.  I mentioned the security personnel training folks outside of Colombia.  But we also worked with Colombia in what was known as the “High Ambition Coalition” to seek a strong climate change agreement in Paris for COP21. 
	 
	Colombia was a co-sponsor of the September 2014 U.N. Human Rights Council resolution to combat violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity.  And we know that Colombia last September, in New York, contingent on reaching a final peace accord, has pledged to increase support for U.N. peacekeeping operations by 2018.  So I think it’s clear that our work with Colombia has been not just about peace in Colombia or about our bilateral relationship, but about the values that we share globally, as well.
	 
	MR. ARONSON:  Thank you, Roberta.  This is the oldest and longest continuing war in the hemisphere.  It’s lasted 51 years.  About 225,000 Colombians have lost their lives; another 6 million have been displaced from their homes.  If you translated that into U.S. population terms, that would be about 1.25 million Americans killed and some 30 million displaced. 
	 
	There have been three previous efforts to negotiate an end to this war, and each of them has failed.  This is the fourth.  When you count both the formal negotiations and the preparatory negotiations, it’s almost into its fourth year.  I think there is a real prospect for success and signing of the peace accord this year -- hopefully within the first half of the year.
	 
	The two sides ended 2015 on a very important note when they agreed to the provisions on victims, which include reparations, truth-telling, transition of justice.  And they started 2016 on a very important achievement when they jointly petitioned the Security Council to send a multilateral monitoring and verification mission to oversee the ceasefire that is coming next.  The Security Council unanimously supported that resolution.
	 
	So now the two sides are focused on the end-game issues -- disarmament, immobilization, reintegration, security for physical actors who give up their weapons.  And these are tough issues.  There is going to be hard bargaining ahead of us.  But I was in Havana just 10 days ago, (inaudible) are very optimistic on both sides.  They’ve agreed to accelerate the process of negotiations and to put all of the endgame issues on the table at once and try to make decisions as rapidly as possible.
	 
	President Obama and Secretary of State Kerry have been strong supporters of this effort from the beginning.  They named a special envoy because President Santos asked that we step up our engagement.  So we are hopeful that this peace process will succeed. 
	 
	And as Roberta and Mark said, we are much committed to accompany -- help Colombia implement the peace, which will be very important.
	 
	Q    Hi, thanks for doing the call.  Mr. Feierstein was saying that Obama will give an increase -- or seek an increase in aid to Colombia in his 2017 budget to signal the U.S. commitment to help with the post-peace process process.  How much of an increase?  What will be the dollar amount?  And can you give us any sense of what it’s going to be used for?  Roberta mentioned in a general sense that it will be helping with demining efforts among other things.
	 
	MR. FEIERSTEIN:  Sure.  Well, first I don't want to get ahead of the President, and I imagine he might speak to this on Thursday, so I’ll let him speak to the specifics. 
	 
	But in terms of areas where we want to be supportive, demining, of course, is an important one.  We recognize in the event of a peace agreement, one of the biggest challenges will be to demobilize the FARC and ensure their reintegration into society as constructive members.  Thus we intend to put a lot of support into that effort.  We recognize, as well, that Colombians want to continue to pursue their counternarcotics efforts.  And we want to be supportive there. 
	 
	And it will be important to expand the presence of the state into areas of the country where the government is currently not present, and provide services such as health care and education -- educational services and such.  So there is a whole range of things that we are currently doing to actually lift Colombia.  But we are looking to expand and recognize the challenges in the event of a peace agreement that will be fairly extensive.
	 
	We also understand that Colombia is doing fairly well economically.  They will be the ones that will finance the bulk of whatever post peace-accord effort is required.  But we do believe that there’s some catalytic assistance the United States can provide in some discrete areas that can make a real difference in the short to medium term.
	 
	Q    Thanks.  I’m wondering whether the President plans to speak with President Santos about the Zika virus and efforts to combat that, and whether there’s any prospect for additional aid or assistance for countries like Colombia or Brazil, for that matter, that are grappling with how to fight the virus and deal with some of its -- the legacy of effects that it’s going to have.
	 
	MR. FEIERSTEIN:  Yes, thanks for the question.  Very, very important topic.  We do anticipate that the President will have an opportunity to speak with President Santos about Zika.  As you know, the President met a few days ago with the Secretary of Health and Human Services here, as well as the national security team to talk about how to work with countries in the region to combat the virus.  He recently spoke with President Rousseff from Brazil to talk about ways again to collaborate.  And we're confident that he and President Santos will discuss efforts -- or potential efforts, as well.  And we are looking at a variety of ways by which we can coordinate with countries like Colombia to combat the virus.
	 
	Q    Thanks for doing this.  I have two questions.  The first one is, I want to know if any of the two former Colombian Presidents -- President Uribe and President Pastrana -- will be attending the ceremony at the White House. 
	 
	And the second one is related to the peace process in Cuba, and that is:  Did you see the likelihood to reach an agreement to have a peace accord?  I wonder if you expect any impact in these future requests for help to -- for aid to Colombia, taking into account that the government of Colombia reached this accord with the FARC, that would be -- how to picture one of the main players under drug trade.
	 
	MR. FEIERSTEIN:  I’ll just take the first part and defer to Bernie for the second.  With regard to President Pastrana, we do anticipate that he will be in attendance at the event.
	 
	MR. ARONSON:  Could you clarify your last part of your question?  You're asking about the effect of taking the FARC out of the drug trade?  Was that what you were asking about?
	 
	Q    I think the high level of President Santos’s visit to celebrate the success of Plan Colombia, the 15 years Plan Colombia, and I was wondering if Colombia and the FARC reach an agreement, that would in some way put the FARC out of the drug trade.  So I wonder how that future agreement will have an impact in the future requests for money for Colombia.
	 
	MR. ARONSON:  Well, you're correct that the FARC is already committed to get out of the drug trade, and that's a condition of them receiving any benefits under the rest of the agreement.  And that will be a significant gain for the Colombian government to combat narco-trafficking gangs.
	 
	It will also create a vacuum in some areas of the country were the FARC was very strong and where they were involved in drug trafficking.  It’s another reason why the U.S. wanted to provide additional help so the government can bring security forces and other government services to those areas and so that vacuum is not allowed to be filled by trafficking criminal gangs that are already operating. 
	 
	As far as how that will affect resources, President Santos has begun a program of manual eradication and crops substitution, which he is carrying out in five locations.  But, in addition, there’s a strong commitment to revive the rural economy, to bring roads and credit and land titles to farmers and help them move to a licit economy.  So that will definitely require resources.
	 
	Q    On the issue of counternarcotics, this meeting comes obviously as the President is putting his own emphasis on the issue of drug abuse.  And I was curious if their conversation would involve any discussion about what the U.S. is trying to don the demand side of the drug equation to try and reduce the incentive for narcotics to cross the border from Latin America.
	 
	MR. FEIERSTEIN:  Yes, I mean, we do anticipate that the Presidents will have an opportunity to talk about the common efforts against drug trafficking.  The President has indicated before, we recognize that we are co-responsible.  Obviously there’s a demand side that we need to be tackling, and then there are supply issues that the Colombians and other countries need to be focusing on as well.  We do think there needs to be a holistic effort.  We have been supportive of Colombia over many, many years in this effort.  They’ve put together a new strategy, as Bernie noted, focusing on manual eradication, crop substitution and interdiction.  And we’re prepared to continue to support them.  We also recognize that there are things the United States need to do, and we’ve invested additional resources to combat drug use in this country.
	 
	MS. JACOBSON:  The only thing that I would add is to just sort of emphasize one of the things Mark has said.  I think the message took a little while to be fully, I think, understood in the region.  But the fact that this administration has taken, frankly, a broader and more balanced approach towards counternarcotics, which includes public health and looking at criminal justice issues, I think was not as well understood in the beginning of the President’s tenure.  And so there were criticisms that were a little bit outdated that we weren’t doing enough, and obviously there’s always more that can be done.
	 
	But I think that the administration has said for a long time that one can’t arrest your way out of this problem, and therefore it has to be a multifaceted approach and a comprehensive approach.  And those are the kinds of conversations that I think we welcome having with leaders in the region.
	 
	Q    One issue that hasn’t been raised and I think it’s really important given the geopolitical tensions -- I was wondering if you could tell us whether or not the two Presidents plan to bring up the issue of the current political and economic stability in Venezuela, which threatens to affect the region and the peace process as well.  I was wondering if that’s going to come up.  And also, the issue of the hurdles and the challenges that remain within what’s being called now Plan Colombia 2.0.  Thank you.
	 
	MR. FEIERSTEIN:  On the first part, look, I obviously can’t predict precisely what the two Presidents will speak to, but I imagine that they will want to talk about issues in the region and issues around the globe.  Colombia has been able to be more successful internally, both economically and politically and with regard to security, as they play a more important role in the region and outside the region.  So I’m confident that there will be an opportunity for them to discuss other issues.
	 
	And then, I’m sorry, the second question?
	 
	MS. JACOBSON:  Plan Colombia 2.0.
	 
	MR. FEIERSTEIN:  Yes, certainly.  Look, I think as we noted before, it’s going to be vital -- this implementation of a peace accord is going to be very, very complicated.  It’s going to take many years.  There are multiple challenges involved.  The President is going to want to hear from President Santos about what those challenges are and how he can be most supportive.  As I noted, we plan to ask Congress for additional resources because we want to make sure that the investments that we’ve made over the last 15 years are consolidated and we don’t lose that.
	 
	But clearly there’s a whole range of challenges that I think the two Presidents will have a chance to speak to, and President Santos will be able to help guide the United States in how we can be most effective in supporting him.
	 
	Q    As you know, many Colombians see Plan Colombia in a rather less positive light than it’s seen in Washington or perhaps by the Colombian government.  Could you perhaps address some of those criticisms and discuss how spending has changed since the early 2000s.  What mistakes have been learned since then? 
	 
	And secondly, regarding the truth reconciliation process, what discussions are there within the U.S. government about declassifing documents relating to U.S. involvement for Colombian government collusion with Autodefensas or other groups? 
	 
	And, sorry, finally, what is the U.S. government’s view on immunity as that pertains to the kind of -- negating the extradition of people you might still want to extradite?  Thanks.
	 
	MR. ARONSON:  Well, as far as Colombians have an opinion about Plan Colombia, obviously Colombia is a country of 50 million people.  It’s a vibrant democracy and there will be many views, and it’s I think very difficult to speak for Colombians, per se, since they’re not a monolith.  I think most of the Colombians that I’ve encountered over the years are very grateful for the fact the United States stood up at a time when the country was really facing enormous threats and challenges and offered its assistance, its training, its hardware.
	 
	I would also note that while the emphasis has been largely on the military aid that was provided, there were large amounts of resources for judicial reform and human rights, and protection of human rights activists and the like.  So the most important verdict is the one that Colombians have made, and I think most of them are extremely appreciative of the fact the United States was their partner in transforming their country from being threatened by violent insurgency to negotiating a lasting peace.
	 
	As far as the truth and reconciliation commission, we have had no requests nor have we had any discussion to release documents.  And I suspect most of those are privileged and would not happen, but we’ll have to wait and see what kind of requests are made.  None have been made at this point, because as you know, the truth commission has not been yet established.
	 
	And as far as impunity regarding extradition, we’ve had an extremely constructive and positive relationship with Colombia, probably more so than almost any other country as far as criminal justice matters, including extradition.  And we appreciate that relationship.  As part of his effort to end this war, President Santos and his negotiators agreed that for crimes committed by the FARC up until the signing of the peace treaty, if the FARC confessed to their responsibility and fully told the truth about their activities and accepted alternative punishment for up to eight years, if those conditions were met along with disarmament and severing themselves from future criminal activity, that the government would not exercise its right to extradite them to the United States.
	 
	And, obviously, we understand extradition is not a reciprocal arrangement.  There’s no requirement that the country that’s asked to extradite its nationals do so.  We’ve had a very cooperative relationship with Colombia, but if the President of Colombia decides for the interest of peace for this group of individuals for this time period he’s not going to extradite and provide alternative punishment, we have to respect his right as a President of a sovereign nation to make that decision.
	 
	MR. FEIERSTEIN:  Yes, I’ll just add, if I can, a couple things.  First, on the extradition piece, as Bernie said, we respect the sovereign decisions taken by the Colombian government, but I would note that the United States will continue to seek extraditions of those who break U.S. laws so that they can be held accountable in U.S. courts.  And in regard to the perceptions of the Plan Colombia, I would just underscore how popular the United States is in Colombia, according to all opinion polls that we’ve seen.  And the relationship we have with Colombia is not just one of government to government, it’s very much people to people.  I think the standing of the United States is very, very strong in Colombia and has been for a long time.
	 
	Q    I apologize, I didn’t quite catch everything in the beginning so if this is something you covered, I apologize.  But the successor strategy that Secretary Kerry wrote about over the weekend, Plan Colombia 2.0 or whatever we want to call it, how much money are we talking about overall?  Like, what is the Obama administration going to request Congress for in terms of additional funding, if anything?  And how much do the Colombians want?  Thank you.
	 
	MS. JACOBSON:  So I’ll start off since we’re talking about my boss.  Nice try -- I know that you’re probably not doing it intentionally because you said you didn’t hear the beginning, but that’s the second attempt to try and figure out exactly how much will be requested in the President’s FY17 budget.  And just like Mark Feierstein, I’m not going to get ahead of the President on that.  I think his budget is coming out shortly.
	 
	But in any case, he will speak to some of these issues, obviously, when he speaks with President Santos and speaks publicly on Thursday.  I think what we can say is that it will be an increased amount of bilateral assistance.  And as I started, the three broad areas that we’re going to be focusing on are security, including counternarcotics, demobilization of FARC fighters and demining.  The second will be expanding state presence and strengthening public institutions.  And the third is justice and assistance for conflict victims.  Now, some of those, especially the public institutions and the justice sector, are certainly things that we have been doing.  The issue is to expand them, especially into places where they haven't existed before because of the conflict.  Others are areas that are obviously new, such as demobilization of FARC fighters, or have not been able to be done because of fighting, such as demining, which is a really critical factor to utilization of, really, large parts of Colombian territory.
	 
	So those are some of the areas that we hope to be working in.  But I think that what Secretary Kerry feels strongly about is that it’s going to be just as important that we maintain a very robust bipartisan commitment to Colombia in the implementation of the peace process as we have during the war in Colombia, because otherwise the gains that have been made, which are really significant, could be lost, and this historic opportunity for peace not realized. 
	 
	Q    I’d like to get back to the question of former President attending the meeting this Thursday, because I didn’t hear anything about Alvaro Uribe.  I’d like to know whether President Uribe is going to visit the White House this Thursday or not.  And secondly, I would like to ask the administration against about when and how the FARC will be removed from the list of terrorist organizations given the prospects of the peace process.
	 
	MR. ARONSON:  President Uribe and President Pastrana were both invited to this event because, as you know, it celebrates and commemorates those who played a significant role in Plan Colombia, and both of those Presidents did, to their very credit.  I think my understanding is President Pastrana is able to come and will come.  I think President Uribe has indicated he is not able to come, and we certainly respect and understand that. 
	 
	As far as the issue of the designation of the FARC as a foreign terrorist organization, that is a designation that’s condition-based, and it’s based on a foreign organization’s use of violence and threat of violence against American citizens and American interests.  If those conditions go away and the organization has fundamentally changed -- given up violence, given up weapons, is no longer hostile to U.S. citizens or interests -- then that designation can be reviewed, and is a routine process for doing so.  So if the FARC disarms completely, separates itself from a lot of the illegal activities, and goes through a process of separation from all its former criminal activities, then that process would be allowed to be carried out.  But how it will end or what the timetable would be would be based on the conditions inside of Colombia.
	 
	MR. PRICE:  Thank you, everyone.  Just as a reminder, this call was on the record, and we will be sending out a transcript following the call for anyone who missed it.  And we appreciate everyone getting on and taking your time.  Thank you very much.
	 
	END 
	3:06 P.M. EST

	 

	Grand Hyatt Hotel
	New York, New York

	For more information on Let Girls Learn, please visit:

>www.letgirlslearn.gov<

	2:11 P.M. EST

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  All right, ladies.  Okay, let’s rock today.  (Laughter.)  We're going to have fun. 

	     MRS. OBAMA:  Hi, everyone.  (Laughter.) 

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Thank you guys so much for coming.  We're so excited.  Everybody here is thrilled to have you.  I have to see what I’m saying here. 

	     So let’s start with you, Mrs. Obama.  As a guest editor of More Magazine last year, the magazine focused a lot on your latest initiative:  Let Girls Learn.  

	     And we did an event for Let Girls Learn in D.C., as well.  Why did you choose a magazine -- since these are all magazine executives out here -- as your vehicle?  And why, in particular, for this initiative?

	     MRS. OBAMA:  Well, magazines are still the best vehicle to tell a detailed long story, to really go in-depth and paint a picture.  And when we launched Let Girls Learn, it was important for us to make sure that people understood the issue and that we could engage readers to take action.  So what better partner than More Magazine.  We were just so thrilled that you were willing to invest the time and the space and the energy to tell that story.

	     And not just to put it in your magazine, but, Leslie, you traveled with me to Cambodia.  That's dedication.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Oh, yes, that was good.

	     MRS. OBAMA:  And you got to see firsthand the struggles that many of these girls are facing, and you talked about those in your speech.  You all saw that in the video -- 62 million girls today are not in school, and the consequences are devastating.  Girls who aren’t educated have higher rates of HIV.  They have higher rates of infant mortality.  They have lower wages.  This impacts not just the individual girls, but their families, their communities, and an entire nation.  And you did such an excellent job in painting that picture because you were on the ground and you could make that investment.

	     So now because of that story, because of the articles you wrote, because of that issue, we have a place to drive people to action.  They have the substance.  They have the comprehensive message. 

	     So now we can partner with social media to do the driving piece to create that buzz.  But it’s helpful to have something for them to go to.  So if we want these young girls to get involved by using the hashtag #62milliongirls, they can go back to the More piece and really go in-depth.  You can't do that with limited characters or with a six-second Vine video.  Only magazines can really make that happen, so we're grateful.  And we had a lot of fun doing it.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  We did have a lot of fun.

	     MRS. OBAMA:  We had a really good time.  Our teams work well together, and we're just so grateful to be able to highlight this issue.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Good.  And I felt it was wonderful for you to have an actual archive of what you felt.  And again, it’s something you can keep on your table.  You can pass along to your kids.  Can you just mention that you knew when you had success when your Mom read it?  That was the -- this is really funny.

	     MRS. OBAMA:  Oh, yes.  My mom doesn't pay attention to anything I do.  (Laughter.)  It’s really sad.  She still loves my brother more.  (Laughter.)  But I’m okay.  I’m getting over it. (Laughter.) 

	     But when she said, you're on the cover on More?  And she actually took the magazine up to her room, and she read every word -- every single word.  So that just tells you the power of the magazine to really reach readers in an in-depth way, something she hasn’t done in a while.  She doesn't read my speeches.  She doesn't look at my clips.  She read More.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  That's how we knew we did good is when we heard that her mom ran upstairs, read it, came downstairs and said it’s great.  Then we all breathed a sigh of relief.  We were actually happy.

	     Can you talk just briefly about how as an American -- when I look at getting a girl in school in Cambodia, how does that affect me?  Why should I care?  Why does that matter to my life? Because you actually have facts and figures that it does.

	     MRS. OBAMA:  Yes, well, the President drew on it.  Girls who are educated, they earn more money.  They raise healthier families.  Some studies show that for every extra year of secondary education that a girl gets, that increases her earning potential by as much as 15 percent.  So this isn’t just good for this country.  We have more educated, empowered people in the world buying products and producing goods, and spending resources and traveling and learning -- that's going to impact our economy, as well.

	     One of the reasons why I like to have young girls at the events that we do around Let Girls Learn is because I want them to be inspired, as well.  I want girls here -- and young people broadly in the United States to really understand this issue, because a lot of times here we take our education for granted because it’s so accessible here.  We're blessed to live in a country where kids have access to school, and it’s important for these kids to know that there are girls who would give anything to trade places with the kids in this country.

	     So we want to make sure that they're empowered to take advantage of the resources that they have, and that they get their education and develop the skills so that they can be part of making change for these 62 million girls.  This is about all of our lives.  Okay, young ladies?  (Laughter.) 

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  From what I heard backstage when you were taking pictures, there are 20 sets of hands that are not getting washed ever again.  (Laughter.)

	     MRS. OBAMA:  Well, you have to wash your hands.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  So there’s going to be a problem.

	     MRS. OBAMA:  They're going to wash their hands because all their nails are really nice.  So they're going to keep their hands clean.

	     So, Julianne and Lena, we all know that education is a foundation for all of us in what we do.  Can you talk a little bit about how your respective educations have shaped you and how it’s given you a voice to speak out?  Who wants to jump in?

	     MS. DUNHAM:  I’ll start.  I grew up right here in New York City and was very, very lucky to have -- there is both great public and private education options in New York.  I happened to go to a private school that was very focused on the arts and focused on alternative ways of learning.  So I went to a school in Brooklyn called St. Ann’s that allowed me in high school to be taking poetry class, to be the head of the student-directed plays program, to be creating literary magazines and starting our own newspaper.  And there was a real sense at our school that it was not only an option, but our obligation to create sort of institutions that would benefit us and benefit other students.

	     And we also didn't get grades there, which is either great or a terrible thing depending on -- it’s great when you're in high school.  It’s confusing when you get to college.  (Laughter.) 

	     And then I spent my college career at Oberlin College in Ohio, which is a school that I’m really proud to have graduated from.  It was the first school in America to admit both women and people of color.  And that's a really great legacy.  And it has an incredibly progressive agenda.  And the motto of the school is:  Learning and Labor.  So really encouraging people to both take their education seriously and also to make volunteerism and activism a part of their education on a day-to-day basis.  And I did get grades there.  I’m happy to say they were always fabulous.  (Laughter.) 

	     But I think those two programs in tandem were incredible.  And I feel really lucky because I talk to so many people who felt like their education actually wasn’t a formative part -- they didn't have close relationships with teachers.  They didn't feel connected to what they were doing.  And I was lucky enough to go to two schools where I felt an extreme sense of loyalty and purpose to the institution. 

	     And I also want to say, I was -- something that’s come to my attention in recent years is I was very lucky that I was able to have parents who were able to pay for my education.  And so I left school without student debt.  And so that is a very rare and blessed position to be in.  And so it’s very important to me to talk about ways that we can alleviate the barriers that stand between women and education so that your education isn’t something you carry with you on your back every single day for the rest of your life.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Julianne, you moved around a lot?  So you were the new kid, your dad was in the Army?

	     MS. MOORE:  My father was in the Army so I went to public schools all over the United States, and then eventually in Germany.  My parents really value education because they didn't get their college degrees until after the three of us were born, and my father was out of Vietnam.

	     So they subsequently both got their -- my father got a law degree, and my mother got two master’s.  And so for them, the idea was that we were all going to be -- we were all going to have higher education.  We were going to go to college, go to graduate school.  And it wasn’t -- I wouldn’t be an actor, however, if I didn't have a teacher in Germany, an English teacher tell me that I should be an actor, which was anathema to me because I’d never seen a play.  I’d never met a real actor.  I only watched TV and movies.  It seemed very, very far away.

	     But she said to me when I was 16, I think you can do this.  And here are some schools that you can apply to.  And I went home to my parents and said, I’m going to be an actress.  (Laughter.) And they were so upset.  (Laughter.)  But to their credit, they said, okay, you can go to college for acting.  But it has to be a college, not a conservatory, because you must have a degree. If it doesn't work out, you should be able to go to graduate school or pursue something else.

	     So with that in mind, with that idea that -- it was interesting having a teacher acknowledge that there was something that I could do that she had seen in me, that was transformative. And that happened in a public school system when I was 16 years old.

	     I read something later on that sometimes that's what kids need to achieve, they need an adult outside of the family member to acknowledge them, to recognize them, to see what they can do and encourage them.  And that's what happens in education.  And that's what makes you develop.  That's what makes you become the person that you eventually are.

	     If that doesn't happen, if you don't have that opportunity, if you don't live in a community where people don't see you, you don't grow.  You don't develop.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Mrs. Obama, do you want to say something about that?  Because you talk a lot about reaching out and changing people’s lives and someone acknowledging you when you were very young?

	     MRS. OBAMA:  Absolutely.  I grew up like Julianne, but we didn't travel.  My parents were working-class folks.  They didn't go to college.  But there was something about their upbringing that knew that -- where they knew that college was an expectation.  It was a must-do, even though it wasn’t something that they achieved.

	     But I didn't always get that encouragement because there were some teachers that I ran into who doubted that a girl like me -- a black girl from the South Side of Chicago -- should apply to Princeton or could get into Harvard.  And that's a lot of times what these girls that we talk about face.  They face a lot of cultural barriers.  Maybe those barriers are coming from within their own families, within their own communities, where somebody is telling them that girls shouldn’t get an education, that you stay home and work and get married early, and take care of your family; or that you're not smart enough; or that you're not good enough to get an education.

	     But as I told the girls in Cambodia, our job is to push past those doubters and to find those caring adults that see the positive in us because they are out there.  Because for all the people that told me I couldn’t do it, I had parents who believed deeply in my ability to do whatever I wanted to do.  I had a big brother who thought I was awesome, even though my mother loves him better than me.  (Laughter.)  It’s okay, though.  I still like him. 

	     But we all -- as young women -- we have to find those people in our lives and grasp onto those positive messages and put the doubters out of our mind.

	     And then when we do achieve, we have to reach back and help others because whatever drove you to succeed, you've got to help another young person in your life find that for herself.  And if we do that, we will not lose the potential of all these girls who go uneducated.  We’ve got too many problems in the world to let half of our population go without the skills and development they need to contribute.

	     You guys are going to be the next movers and shakers, the people who are going to solve climate change, who are going to deal with terrorism, who are going to deal with poverty and hunger.  And we need you smart and ready and confident in your abilities.  And we need girls around the world to all have that opportunity so that they can be sitting here like the three of us, talking about all that we’ve achieved.  (Applause.)

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  All right.  So we’ll get to the topic at hand, which is:  Media With Purpose.  So we’ll start with Mrs. Obama.  When you agreed to be the guest editor of More -- or when you sit down with YouTube sensation Michelle Phan, who was with us in Japan, or you agree to be part of an episode of “Project Runway Junior” to lift girls up, how do you make that decision?  And why?

	     MRS. OBAMA:  We really think about the audience that we're trying to reach.  It’s simple:  Who are we trying to get our message to?  And oftentimes, we're trying to talk to young people.  And as mom living with two Generation Zers, I think that's what you all are called.  You're Zers -- teens with an attitude.  I’ve got two of them in my house.  (Laughter.)  So I know that the way they take in the world is very different from the way I did growing up. 

	     They're on their phones, and they're -- what’s this called, swiping? 

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Scrolling. 

	     MRS. OBAMA:  I think it’s swiping.  Swiping.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Swiping.  Sorry, that's old speak.

	     MRS. OBAMA:  You don't scroll, you swipe.  You're swiping, and they're sharing Vines.  And they're laughing at stuff on their phones.  They're not watching the evening news.  They're not reading The New York Times.  No offense, but they're not.  So we have to try to reach them where they are.

	     So we find the programs and the people and the role models that they look up to, and we engage.  So in dealing with that particular audience, we have to be nimble.  We can't just do what was traditionally done.  We have to figure out if we really want kids to engage in these issues, if we really want young girls in the United States to care about their education and eat better and be more active.  We have to talk to them where they are.  And they are talking to Michelle Phan.  And they may be looking at how she does makeup.  But if she turns her platform into something positive, which she understood, they're going to start listening to her on other issues, as well.  So we're with Michelle Phan.

	     So everything is fair game if you really want to be effective in getting your message across, particularly if you want to attract young people.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  And, Lena, do you want to talk a little bit about -- there is a tsunami of media out there.  There are magazines, newspapers, every single channel you could imagine.  YouTube.  Why would you start a newsletter?

	     MS. DUNHAM:  It’s a great question, and one I ask myself every day.  (Laughter.) 

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  And it’s a great newsletter, by the way.  I have to tell you.  I love it.  It’s very literary.  It’s fabulous.

	     MR. DUNHAM:  Thank you very much, and we really appreciate it.  And it’s been a real learning experience.  I have an incredible staff that works with me.  Most of them are women under 30 who are far savvier than me about what’s happening on the Internet.  And I think Mrs. Obama said it best when she said that there are certain things that you can't express within the character limitations of Twitter.  And you can't expect there to be a healthy dialogue that takes place in that kind of finite forum.

	     And something that was really important to me was that I know as a younger woman -- I’m now approaching 30, but in my early 20s, I felt very --

	     MRS. OBAMA:  You're still young.  (Laughter.)  Babies.  Like, whoa, what?

	     MS. MOORE:  She’s not 30.  (Laughter.) 

	     MS. DUNHAM:  I feel deeply aged, but thank you for reminding me.  But I know that politics for me, I felt very disenfranchised.  And it was really hard for me to sift through media and understand.  I wish someone would just make a map for me.  What should I care about?  Who should I vote for?  What are the issues that are affecting me?  And how do I find a way to get a grasp on them?

	     And so while Lenny Letter has plenty of articles about nail care and the kind of goofier sides of reproductive health, and plenty of stuff to satisfy an audience that may want to be amused and a little bit titillated, a huge focus for us is highlighting politicians -- many female politicians, pro-choice, who care about reproductive justice, who care about the Black Lives Matter movement, who care about the issues that are the most important to our readers, and really letting millennial women into the lives of these politicians.  So doing a new, more intimate kind of interview with anyone from Lucy Flores, to Donna Edwards -- women who are changing the conversation in the country and who these girls may not find out about -- may not go deep enough into the Times to find about it, because I know that I didn't.   And so that's been -- it’s been really amazing to see so many young women engage with the political process when given the tools to do so.

	     And that was a huge impetus for us in starting the newsletter.  And every time we get a Tweet or an Instagram that says that, hey, today I went out and rallied for this particular politician.  Or I think I’m going to vote in the primary this year.  We know that it was worth it to begin.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  That's awesome.  That's great. 

	     Julianne, do you want to talk a little bit about aligning yourself with Everytown USA?

	     MS. MOORE:  Yes.  (Laughter.)  Actually, it was a media moment that sort of led me to it.  It was interesting.  I had been very affected obviously by experiencing gun violence in our culture.  But I was affected as a citizen, as a parent, and it was something that I would talk about, and I’d kind of lament about.  And I would tweet about it. 

	     And I was doing an article for the Hollywood Reporter last year.  It was a cover story, and it was just about my career and my experiences, and what I was interested in artistically, and blah, blah, blah.  At the very end of the article, he asked me -- the writer asked me, did I get a blowback on Twitter about being pro-choice.  I said, actually, no, I didn't.  I got most of my blow-back about gun safety.

	     And my quote was, I don't understand how gun safety somehow threatens the Second Amendment, which I thought was a pretty safe point and not at all inflammatory.  And they ran a headline that said, Julianne Moore does not believe in guns. 

	     And I was like, wow.  (Laughter.)  Wow.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  That would be one for your agent, right?

	     MS. MOORE:  Yes, I was like, how does this happen?  How did something that was really meant to be kind of a practical and a common-sense comment turned into click bait.

	     So I said, well, what can I do about this?  And I feel like there were so many people that were running from the issue of gun safety and gun violence because of the blowback they were getting, because of those kinds of headlines, because suddenly some people who were saying, this is unconstitutional.  This is against the Second Amendment, people are trying to take away guns, and I’m like, that’s not the point at all.  I wanted to change the culture around talking about guns.  I want to talk about commonsense.  I want to shape the gun industry like the car industry.  That was a very dangerous machine that was invented, and people were -- there were tremendous fatalities, and slowly, with different kinds of legislation, with seatbelts and airbags and Mothers Against Drunk Drivers, we changed the culture around driving.  And then that automobile became slightly less dangerous.  Why can’t we do the same with guns?

	     So I thought, okay, I know that actors are reluctant to talk about this because of that blowback, but how I can align myself with an organization that I admire and really begin to kind of get out there.  So I went through contacts on my computer and just literally went through them and said, hey, I’m doing this thing, you don’t have to do much, but this is really about safety.  And I was also using marriage equality as an example, that we’re going to go state by state by state and really slowly change hopefully laws and awareness.  And people signed up.  Because I felt like we are ready to do something.  I mean, the President has actually taken amazing action just recently, and really has talked about how do we make it less possible for dangerous individuals to have guns.  This is not something that’s anti-Constitution.  So that’s why I feel like I was able to gather people around me, because it really was about commonsense and not about, I don’t know, starting a Twitter war.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Okay.  Stay away from the Twitter wars.  We’re going to talk about that.  Okay, Lena, you’ve written a lot of inspiring articles that empowered women everywhere.  Tell us about why sharing your personal story -- you get extremely personal -- why is that important to engaging a reader?  Because we all in the media know personal is better, but maybe you’re even out on the frontline of personal?

	     MS. DUNHAM:  Well, I think the old adage the personal is political has never been more true.  And the fact is, is that people need to feel a connection to an issue in order to take action.  And I think that one of the things that’s so amazing about watching that Let Girls Learn video that you just showed is that you’re not just talking about it -- we’re seeing these girls and seeing the joy on their faces, and seeing what happens when you put young women in the way of education. 

	And so an example is that I suffer from endometriosis, which is an illness that many women have in the United States and that is highly under -- women’s health in general is highly under-researched and highly underfunded.  And many doctors are ignorant about its effects.  And it’s easy to write a piece with statistics -- the massive gap between how we research diabetes and how we research women’s health.  Massive gap between how we research men with heart attacks and how we research women’s health.  And while I don’t have my sheet in front of me, it’s an alarming gap in the way we examine those issues. 

	And so I could have gone on Lenny and just talked about the specifics of the statistics and the lack of funding, but what felt to me both personally gratifying and more effective was to talk about what I had been through in the 10 years before my diagnosis.  And the outpouring of support and also the outpouring of questions and interest in how can we be helpful and how can we change the conversation around this illness so that women feel less alone and feel less cared for was remarkable. 

	And I don’t believe I would have gotten that result if I hadn’t sort of taken the chance and shared some details that were really painful and what some might consider TMI because it does deal with a very specific part of your body.  And it was amazing. And since then, just on Instagram and Twitter, I’ve seen the conversation flourish.  I’ve seen pieces in The Guardian about endometriosis -- long, investigative pieces on why are we dealing with women’s health the way that we are.  And so I think that when you allow people into your story, it resonates with them in a new way, and they want to take the issue on in a way that they wouldn’t when they were just presented with numbers.

	MS. SEYMOUR:  Along that line, Mrs. Obama, I was going to ask you about girls education is such a personal topic for you, so in a very similar way, how does putting your story out there connect you to the girls?

	MRS. OBAMA:  When you’re the First Lady or you’re an actress, or you’re larger in life to many girls living in poor communities, living in urban cities, not just here in the United States but around the world, you seem untouchable.  They look at you and they think there’s no way I can be here.  There’s no way I could do that, because there must have been some magic in her life, some luck, some charm.  She must have a special potion going on.

	And for me, it is so important for kids, in particular, to understand that I am them, they are me.  That I was in their shoes, literally, and if I can be sitting up here, Princeton/Harvard educated First Lady of the United States having run nonprofit organizations and practiced law and worked as a vice president of an academic medical institution and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, you can do it, too.  But you don’t get that if all they see is Michelle Obama, the First Lady.  That’s too untouchable.

	So I feel it’s so important to connect to these kids so that they can see themselves in me.  So that they push all that impossibility out of their heads and they replace that with the notion that with hard work and investment and dedication, that they can achieve.

	Now, it’s not as easy for girls in countries that don’t invest in their education.  But it’s still not impossible.  And we have to be those role models for them.  But in order to do that, we have to be vulnerable and we have to tell our stories in an honest and authentic way.  And you can’t do that if you’re trying to be something that you’re not.  If you’re not willing to connect and share and talk about your own fears and missteps.  It makes us more human, and so they think that they can be sitting here too, and they can.  So I think it’s just essential

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  So, Julianne, talk about a quote that you had, which was really wonderful.  “What you gain as an actor is a sense of empathy.  You’re trying to put yourself in someone’s shoes and see what that feels like.”  Now, all actors do this, but not all of them take on the issues that you take on.  So what are the moral and ethical obligations of being an entertainer today?

	     MS. MOORE:  That’s an interesting question.  I was listening to NPR the other day.  I was driving uptown to get my daughter, and there was a scientist being interviewed and talking about medical research and the ethics of medical research and how do you participate in it.  And one of the things that she said that really touched me was that, as human beings, we have a social contract with one another.  That’s what allows us to live with one another, that’s what allows you to stop at a red light, to know that you should give somebody a hand when they’ve fallen down, to do research into disease.  And I do believe that it’s the same with the arts.  It sounds -- not to be kind of highfalutin about it or anything like that, but I do think that you enter into it because you’re trying to figure out, first of all, who you are, and who everybody else is. 

	     And when I talk to young people about what drew me to acting, I always say it was reading first.  It’s not that I had an instinct to be a performer.  I don’t actually innately like that, but I like story, I like narrative because that’s how I learned about the world. 

	     And thing two, when I was younger, when I was a kid, I would read a book and say, well, how do they know that about me?  (Laughter.)  And then I’d realize, well, it was about them.  But the universal was what was connecting us.  So when I found a way to do that in my work, it was utterly thrilling.  And the best thing that I -- the best compliment I’ve received is when somebody said, that was me, that was my story.  So that’s what you’re always trying to do with your work -- is to figure out where you and this character and the audience connects.  Because you’re trying to -- the audience comes to see themselves.  They don’t come to see you.  They come to see their hopes and dreams and feelings reflected.  So that, to me, is the most exciting thing.

	     And then in terms of what you’re talking about, telling a personal story with charities as well, and what magazines allow you to do when they do ask you something personal, is to reveal that and to say, this is who I am and this is why I care, and it’s reflected in my work.  And even with an issue like gun violence or gun safety, I feel like I’ve very representative of my audience.  I’m a woman with children who works, who cares about these things, cares about their children’s safety, and I say this is what I was doing when Newtown happened -- what were you doing?  And everybody is like, oh yeah. 

	     So once again, it’s about entering -- the idea of entering into that social contract in your work and in your life and in your relationships is kind of an exciting and validating way to be alive.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Although I will tell you as an editor, and a lot of editors out here know, that sometimes when you ask a celebrity to get personal, they’re like, ah!  They run away from personal.  So that’s fantastic that you actually put the two together, which is great.

	     So let’s talk about using media strategically and successfully.  And I’m going to start with Mrs. Obama.  And I’ve covered a lot of First Ladies.  And usually, they want to keep a distance between them and the audience, between them -- they want to be out there, carefully taken care of, and in a little bubble, but not too much, don’t get too close.

	     So you have done so many kinds of media, and you are reaching out directly.  You’re reaching out through all social media.  What is it that you -- what made you decide to engage so directly, and what have you learned so far?  Because you really leapt -- you’ve leapt right into American lives.

	     MRS. OBAMA:  Well, I think it’s just the sign of the times. You think about what -- how different the media climate was in 2008 when we were campaigning before we even came into office.  I mean, if you think about it, there was no Twitter, there was no Snapchat.  We didn’t even have iPhones.  We still use BlackBerrys in the White House.  We’re still hanging onto our BlackBerrys.  We love our Blackberrys.  But I have an iPhone so I’m trying to hang in there with the times.  But things have really changed.

	     So as a result, if you want to communicate and be effective in communicating your message, these days you really have to be nimble.  And you have to be willing to take some risks and try new things and engage on platforms that you might normally not have before, because things are so different today. 

	     I was talking to my staff when we were just talking about this topic, and I said, look, if Eleanor Roosevelt were alive today, I am sure she would have a Twitter account and maybe in addition to her radio program -- (laughter) -- but she would have a Twitter account.  Because that’s how you communicate these days.  So I don’t know that I’m doing anything groundbreaking.  I’m pretty sure that the next administration, the next first spouse, if they want to be effective in communicating their message -- oh, you caught that?  (Laughter.)  I’m just being neutral, because, you know, the world is big and interesting.  (Laughter.)

	     But the next first spouse is going to have to figure out how to connect with the audiences they’re trying to connect with, and who knows what the new platforms will be in the years to come.  There’s Vine now.  I mean, I still -- my mind is blown by Vine when my staff tells me you have six seconds, I’m like, to do what?  (Laughter.)  What do you expect me to do in six seconds?

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Don’t ask that question of certain people.  (Laughter.)

	     MRS. OBAMA:  But I do it!  And it works.  So you have to be flexible in this current social media climate.  And so I’m just  -- I want to make sure that the issues that I take on really move the needle.  I think that’s ultimately my goal.  I mean, I don’t want to do something just for the sake of doing it.  I don’t want to have initiatives that are just slogans.  It’s important, for example, with Let Girls Learns that we actually change the culture around the world about how we educate our girls.  So it makes no sense for me to use communication tools that are not reaching the audiences that I need to reach to have that impact. So we have to figure out how those changes are affecting the message every single day.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Has anything surprised you about a certain media that you’ve used in terms of reaching a different audience? Is anything -- when you use Instagram or you use Snapchat, or you use -- and are you -- how are you positioning each one of those things differently? 

	     MRS. OBAMA:  I’m different.  I’m always surprised when young people tweet so freely.  I’m just, gosh, you guys really should think about this stuff.  (Laughter.)  I want to talk to the young people sitting right here.  Okay, you guys be careful with social media.  I mean, before I tweet --

	     MS. DUNHAM:  Take it from me, you’ve got to be careful.

	     MRS. OBAMA:  You’ve got to be careful.  (Laughter.)

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  We’re going to bring that up.

	     MRS. OBAMA:  And I’m surprised at how not careful people are.  When I tweet, I’m really thinking about what I say, and I’ve got three people looking it.  And we’re just like, well, what does that word -- what is that going to communicate?  And the notion that people are just throwing out their statements is sometimes surprising.  But one of the things we talk about with young people is that you’ve got to be careful when you use social media. 

	Know that when you put something out in the world, it lasts, and you can’t really take it back that easily.  So you have to be responsible.  And that goes to bullying and all that stuff that you think is cute when it’s just in the classroom and then you put it out there, and it lasts forever, and it can have that kind of impact.  So we try to spend a lot of time talking to kids about just the dangers and the challenges. 

	But I’m still surprised at how freely people are willing to put stuff out there.  And I consider myself pretty open, but we still are very thoughtful about what we do and what we say.  And rarely do you hear me just -- as my husband would say -- pop off. (Laughter.)  I don’t just pop off on social media.  I really try to be thoughtful and make sure that what we’re saying is actually, as I said before, going to move the needle in a positive way.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  All right, Lena.  You’re up.  Talking about popping off on certain things.

	     MS. DUNHAM:  I pop off sometimes.  (Laughter.)

	     MRS. OBAMA:  Lena is popping off.

	     MS. DUNHAM:  Which, you know what, I mean, that’s a great term for it.  Sometimes popping off can be exciting because it starts a conversation and there’s an immediacy to it and people can feel your passion and they join you.  And sometimes it’s a giant mistake.  And it’s been a real education for me in the five years that I’ve been working to really -- I had a Twitter account before anybody knew who I was, and I went back and I erased some things.  (Laughter.) 

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Can you erase?  I didn’t know you can erase.

	     MS. DUNHAM:  Oh, yeah, you can delete a tweet.  Take it from me, you can delete a tweet.  (Laughter.)

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  All right, okay.  (Laughter.)  Like if you’re a celebrity.  I don’t know if the average person can delete.

	     MS. DUNHAM:  Oh, we all have that power.  And you can edit an Instagram caption.  Never forget.  (Laughter.)  But I think it’s really important, as you said, I really do often see young women’s presence online and think, like, in three years, you’re going to regret not just -- less the way you were representing yourself than the way that you were interacting with other people. 

	And I actually had a funny experience.  This year I was following a friend’s daughter on Instagram and there were a lot of -- and I knew that she was letting me follow her, but she wasn’t letting her father follow her.  And there were posts that I found a little risqué. 

	And she’s 15, and so I really debated doing this -- you never want to interfere with how anyone is raising their child, but I sent him an email and I said, I think you should just check it out, it’s a little sensual, if you will.  (Laughter.)  I’m a little stressed about it.  And then he wrote me back, and he said, I checked with her and she says it art. 

	And I was like, okay, well if you’re going to be -- I mean, you know, I was like, I did my job, my job here is done.  (Laughter.)  I can take no more action.  But I do think it’s not -- people often say, what will you do later when someone looks you up for a job interview, what will you do when you know you’re being -- you want a job in the CIA and you’re being checked out. And I think the bigger issue is what follows you around personally, because I will often -- sometimes if someone writes me something hostile on Twitter, which I look at less than I used to, I’ll go to their account and I’ll realize they’re a 14 or 15-year-old kid. 

	And they’re not just dealing with me that way; they’re dealing with their classmates that way.  They’re approaching the world with a level of hostility and anger because of the veil of secrecy that the Internet allows for.  And I just think about the way that that -- interacting with people that way will follow you into your life and it won’t just have negative consequences for can you get a job or can you make a living, but negative consequences for you emotionally.  And I’ve had to be really careful because I think Julianne has learned through her work talking about gun safety, these are very hot-button topics for people.  And you have to walk the line between expressing yourself honestly and protecting yourself because there are a lot of people who have -- there are a lot of people on the Internet who have dangerous mentalities.

	MS. SEYMOUR:  Julianne, do you have anything about -- I mean, are there any medias that you like to use better for certain reasons or how do you control it?

	MS. MOORE:  Well, I think it’s interesting what they’re saying about -- it’s short form that actually I feel is pretty dangerous sometimes because you’re not allowed to express a complicated idea.  So I think it’s interesting when you’re talking to a room full of people who work in media where they’re having these giant changes where people were able to express themselves in essay forms or articles or you put a finer point on something, but this idea that something is going to come out, it’s going to be pithy, and it’s going to encapsulate an issue one way or another, I think is inherently difficult. 

	Because life -- issues aren’t that way.  So it’s not yes or no, it’s not black or white, it’s not I think this, you’re an idiot.  That’s where I find -- that’s where I want to slow the conversation down and say, like, let’s really talk about this and let’s not make everything so black and white all the time.  And that is pervading our culture.  It comes from the Internet and we see it in television and other forms of media, too.  And so I’m really trying to fight against that, but I don’t know how.

	MS. DUNHAM:  People having 140-character opinions about things that they haven’t actually read.  Like I’m sure plenty of people have plenty of things to say about your Hollywood Reporter interview without engaging in the fullness of your idea about what would be inappropriate --

	     MS. MOORE:  Or the idea wasn’t articulated in the article.  It was just a one-question thing at the end.  But that was an issue -- we were talking about this backstage -- I had an interview with a young woman who kept asking me -- she was from a women’s magazine and she was asking me a lot of sort of hot-button political questions.  And I kept stonewalling her.  And she said, are you uncomfortable with this line of questioning?  I said, I do not feel comfortable with how this is going to be expressed in this format.  I said, I don't know that these quotes aren't going to be just taken out of context and just made into a headline.  I would like to be able to speak eloquently and authentically about this, but I don't know what the format is allowing.

	     And so you don't want it to be just like, oh, headline.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Well, that's why you all have to edit a magazine, because of its doors and it's a document, you know, and it doesn’t come and go. 

	     MRS. OBAMA:  So everyone should have an opportunity to do that.  I highly recommend it. 

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Do you want to talk at all about the Instagram  -- that you were on Instagram for a while and then you posted a picture, and did it go kooky?  Is that what I heard? 

	     MS. DUNHAM:  Did something happen with an Instagram picture -- (laughter) -- because a lot has happened -- maybe you're referring to the fact that I've been fairly public about the fact that I no longer check my own Twitter because I found that the hostility towards women and the expressions of violence were too much.  And it's something that I've been very open about because I think Twitter is an important platform, but I think that they, as well as many media platforms -- many Internet media platforms, social media platforms have to be putting more barriers in place for what is ultimately the violent harassment of women.

	     And just because it's not face-to-face doesn’t mean it's not extremely dangerous emotionally; doesn’t mean it couldn't transfer into something really terrifying in the real world.  And so I stopped checking my -- I started using a social media manager, which I know this is sort of supposed to be the wizard behind the curtain, but I wanted to be open about that to say, hey, you may think that I have a fancy celebrity life where I'm hidden from this kind of thing, but I, too, am experiencing violent bullying on the Internet, and it affects me also.  And I think that until new codes of conduct are in place, I'm not going to be able to return to looking at that platform freely. 

	     MS. MOORE:  And back to the social contacting, too, the thing about our social contacting -- because it is public, so it's interesting to me that we've developed this weird form of communication where people are not public with their name or their person.  And that I think is dangerous.  And I wish that there were a way for people to claim their presence on social media so that they reveal themselves.  Because I do think that that's not great for us culturally to have that kind of --

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  Yes, I think the anonymity is what the problem is. 

	MS. DUNHAM:  And I think it's important to remember that threats are more than just someone saying, I'm going to come to your house and I'm going to hurt you.  Insulting someone’s appearance, insulting someone’s religion or their race -- all of that, to me, constitutes a threat.  And I think we can make changes to how we control that on the Internet without threatening our First Amendment right.

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  So let’s talk a little bit about humor, because you guys all have a great sense of humor. 

	     MS. DUNHAM:  I've seen her on Fallon.  She’s --

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  I've seen her with Big Bird.  She’s pretty good.  I've seen her on TV on all kinds of things.  So let’s start with Mrs. Obama, because you are not afraid of doing humor at all.  So how do you think that's gotten your message across?  And why is it so effective, especially also for Let Girls Learn, and all your different programs that you have here?

	     MRS. OBAMA:  Humor is an equalizer and it sort of reduces the tension -- it just eases the message.  And it's fun.  When I look at my girls and what they share, it's usually something funny.  That's how you catch them.  You catch them with a laugh, or something highly embarrassing or stupid.  It's one or the other.  But that's what’s going to pull them in. 

	     And again, the goal is to be effective and get the message across, so if it means that I've got to rap on the South Lawn, okay, I can do that.  (Laughter.)  That's fun.  And what happens is that it's that funny thing, oh my God, the First Lady is dancing with a turnip -- (laughter.)

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  A lot of dancing in these videos.

	     MRS. OBAMA:  A turnip for what?  That's my staff -- they’re like, make her dance again.  Now we're going to rap.  It's like, okay, really?  (Laughter.)  But it captures the attention.  And then behind the humor is hopefully a message or a call to action, or maybe if a kid sings “Go to college and get some knowledge” a few times it will actually sink in, and they’ll think, oh, maybe I'll go to college.

	     So humor is a hook.  And it's also a way to once again become a little more relatable.  When we talk about Let's Move, for example, just to talk briefly about another issue, we really want to make it less intimidating -- exercise and movement -- so let’s think about making it fun.  Parents, you can get up and dance with your kid.  It doesn’t have to be serious.  Healthy living can be fun. 

	     So we're just trying to connect -- and have a little fun ourselves in the meantime.  There’s nothing wrong with having a little fun, right?

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  How do you guys use humor, Julianne and Lena? Is there anything that you regret?  Or anything you wish you’d done more humorously?

	     MS. MOORE:  No, never.  I mean, no regrets.  I look back at my body of work, though, and I think, geez, I seem so serious.  I realize I probably do more dramas, but I watch more comedy.  So I am -- I'm more affected by that and I'm drawn in by it and I look for it everywhere.  I'm actually not very serious when I'm working, even on a set.  I'm not a serious person --

	     MS. SEYMOUR:  You're not like Daniel Day Lewis -- you're not staying in character between takes?

	     MS. MOORE:  No.  But I think that that's what makes the world go round.  That's how we connect.  That's how we display our intelligence.  That's how we try to impress someone -- we tell a joke.  I think Lena is a master at comedy.  I mean, truly. Truly.

	     MS. DUNHAM:  I mean, I love comedy both because it's fun and also because it, as you said, has the ability to push the needle forward on issues.  And often a joke will stick with you in a remarkable way until, as you said, the issue is really kind of embedded in you.  And there’s no jokes that I’ve made in my work as a writer or director or performer that I regret.  I would say the only jokes I’ve made that I regret have been on social media because of the fact that there’s this immediacy where you’re like, oh, I’m just going to throw it out there, and you forget that you’re joking about something that’s serious.  Whereas when I’m making my show, I have a lot of time to really -- I write the joke, I say the joke, I edit the joke, and I have time to make sure that I’m really standing behind what I’ve put into the world, where there have been a couple times. 

	And one time, some guy said to me, like, why -- in a snarky way, on Twitter -- why are you -- please, for the love of God, why are you naked so much on your show?  And I was sitting in a hotel room at, like, one in the morning; I’d just hosted SNL the night before.  I was exhausted.  And I wrote back, “Gee, Mister, I don’t know, ask my uncle.”  And suddenly, I was like, why did I do that?  Why did I do that?  (Laughter.)  It was really bad.  And then, of course, because I’m such a people pleaser, I apologized like 72 times, to the point where everyone was like, shut up, we’re fine with it, just go away.  Yeah, go to bed.  And so I think that’s another reason my social media manager is helpful, because she’ll be like, do you want to think about this one for 10 minutes?  And I’m like, thank you for stopping me.

	MS. SEYMOUR:  Oh, my goodness.  The late-night tweets.  So in our last few minutes here, I would like to hear from Mrs. Obama -- what’s the next phase for Let Girls Learn?  And how can the rest of us help you here today to get the word out?  Obviously, the media companies are helping, but what else can we do for you?

	MRS. OBAMA:  I just want to thank the media companies for stepping up in a big way.  I mean, I think you laid out -- we’re working closely with the Peace Corps, and we’re developing a fund right now.  And we’ve raised over a million dollars, and it’s funding many, many projects run by Peace Corps volunteers on the ground.  There are so many opportunities to engage, so we hope that all of you find a way to get involved.  This is going to be an issue that I’m going to tackle for a very long time.  When we leave office in a year, as Barack and I say, we’ll still be young.  We still got some life in us.  So we’re in the process of thinking through how do we best use the next phase, the next platform that we have to continue to impact the issues that we care about.

	And one of the things I learned coming into the office as First Lady, the thing everybody asked before Barack had won a primary or done anything was, what’s your platform going to be as First Lady?  I was like, really?  I don’t even know what that platform is going to feel like, so I can’t answer that question.  I don’t know what that role is going to be.  And I feel the same way about the next phase of life and what I’m going to do.  I don’t know what it will feel like to be the former First Lady and what power or voice I will have, and how to best use that effectively.  I’ll know better when I’m there. 

	But I know that girls’ education, educating our kids here in the United States, making sure that they make the most of their education, they take their education seriously, that they invest in themselves, they push themselves, and that we do that for kids all around the globe, that is going to be something that I’m going to be working on for the rest of my life.  Because I think about my girls.  When I think about girls’ education, I think about the potential that all of these young women have and what a waste it would be if we didn’t capitalize on it, and if they didn’t capitalize on it.  And that’s not a message -- that’s not a problem that’s going to get solved in a few years or possibly not even in a generation.  And we’re going to need to keep pushing hard on this issue to change cultural norms around the world to demand that countries invest in their girls as much as they invest in their boys. 

	And we want to make sure that kids here continue to be inspired by the stories of these girls.  I mean, there are girls around the world who are putting their lives at risk to get an education.  Malala Yousafzai.  I could go on.  The girls in Nigeria, risking kidnap just to get an education.  So we don’t have the luxury of squandering the education that we have.  And I want our kids to be just as passionate and just as hungry to do what they can to make the most of their education.  So that’s something we’re going to be talking about for a long time to come.

	I don’t know, that was kind of a long answer.  (Applause.)

	MS. SEYMOUR:  And, Julianne, what’s next for your project?  And then, Lena, just tell us --

	MS. MOORE:   Well, I think in terms of the Creative Council for Everytown, we just want to be part of the change.  We don’t expect it to be fast.  Like I said, our model is marriage equality.  We want to go state by state.  We’d like to see universal background checks.  I’d like to see a lockbox in every household that has a kid in it that also has a gun.  We just want to take steps to keep guns out of the hands of dangerous people.  And it will be slow and probably a little bit boring, but it will get done.  I really do believe it will get done.  (Applause.) 

	MS. SEYMOUR:  Great.  Lena?

	MS. DUNHAM:  Well, our goal at Lenny is to continue to expand and to move into other countries, and both translate our content and make content that’s specific to those new locales so that it can be a resource for women about issues not just in the U.S. -- because the issues that a woman is facing in the Middle East, the issues that a woman is facing in Brazil are very different than the issues that we’re facing here in the United States.  And so while some content can be universal, other content has to be specific.  And the Internet can often be the safest and most private place for women to learn and to gain resources.  And so it would be a real dream to be able to continue that conversation, not just with American feminists, but with global feminists.

	MS. SEYMOUR:  Great.  And with that, thank you all for being here today.  (Applause.)  Thank you so much.

	             

	                             END           3:04 P.M. EST

Today, Lisa Monaco, Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism concluded a series of meetings with French security and intelligence officials to discuss ways to strengthen counterterrorism cooperation in the wake of the tragic terrorist attacks of November 13, 2015, in Paris. During discussions with French Minister of the Interior Bernard Cazeneuve, Senior Military Advisor General Benoit Puga, and General Directorate for Internal Security Director Patrick Calvar, Ms. Monaco discussed ways to further enhance our security and intelligence cooperation and information sharing with France --including against the flow of foreign terrorist fighters-- to disrupt terror plots and prevent future attacks. Ms. Monaco also discussed with French counterparts the intensified efforts of the United States in our multipronged effort against ISIL. Minister Cazeneuve, General Puga, and Director Calvar thanked Ms. Monaco for unwavering U.S. support to France in the aftermath of the November 2015 attacks and expressed appreciation for our subsequent enhanced intelligence and law enforcement cooperation. Ms. Monaco reiterated that the United States will continue to support France in its efforts to bring to justice those who helped plan or enable these attacks. Noting that France is one of our strongest partners in the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL, Ms. Monaco discussed a number of ways we can continue to enhance our respective whole-of-government efforts to degrade and destroy ISIL.

	 

	Since the start of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine almost two years ago, the United States has taken decisive and sustained steps to assure our allies and bolster NATO’s collective defense capabilities in light of a changing European security environment.  Under the European Reassurance Initiative (ERI), we have increased the U.S. military presence in Europe; conducted additional bilateral and multilateral exercises; improved U.S. and allied military infrastructure in Europe; prepositioned more U.S. equipment in Europe; and intensified efforts to build the capacity and interoperability of allies and partners.  ERI has provided funding for Operation Atlantic Resolve, by which U.S. forces have maintained a persistent air, maritime, and ground presence in Central and Eastern Europe.  Together with our allies the United States has also taken important steps to implement the Readiness Action Plan, a package of measures to assure allies and adapt NATO to its long-term military requirements, which was agreed at the 2014 Wales Summit in light of the aggressive posture that Russia has taken on the Alliance’s periphery.

	These steps were all necessary, but they are not sufficient.  The Alliance has more work to do.  As we approach the 2016 NATO Summit in Warsaw, it is clear that the United States and our allies must do more to advance our common defense in support of a Europe that is whole, free, and at peace.  That is why today my Administration announced a four-fold increase in ERI funding for Fiscal Year 2017.  An ERI funding level of $3.4 billion will enable the United States to strengthen our robust military posture in Europe and improve our ability to uphold our Article 5 commitments to NATO members.  It should make clear that America will stand firm with its allies in defending not just NATO territory but also shared principles of international law and order. 

	This is a challenging and important time for NATO, a cornerstone of transatlantic security that is increasingly called upon to be a cornerstone of global security.  NATO is necessarily evolving to meet a range of challenges, not just to its east but also to its south, where civil war and failing states continue to fuel mass migration and terrorism.  All 28 NATO allies are members of the Counter-ISIL coalition, and NATO allies and partners must continue to work together to support the Afghan National Defense and Security Forces.  This budget request ensures that the United States is prepared to meet its commitments to NATO, and should be a reminder that every ally must properly resource its defense and invest in the capabilities our Alliance requires.
