
	EXECUTIVE ORDER

	- - - - - - -

	REVOCATION OF EXECUTIVE ORDERS 13574, 13590, 13622, AND 13645 WITH RESPECT TO IRAN, AMENDMENT OF EXECUTIVE ORDER 13628 WITH RESPECT TO IRAN, AND PROVISION OF IMPLEMENTATION AUTHORITIES FOR ASPECTS OF CERTAIN STATUTORY SANCTIONS OUTSIDE THE SCOPE OF U.S. COMMITMENTS UNDER THE JOINT COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OF ACTION OF JULY 14, 2015

	 

	By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.) (NEA), the Iran Sanctions Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-172) (50 U.S.C. 1701 note), the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act of 2010 (Public Law 111-195) (22 U.S.C. 8501 et seq.), the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012 (Public Law 112-158), the Iran Freedom and Counter-Proliferation Act of 2012 (subtitle D of title XII of Public Law 112-239) (22 U.S.C. 8801 et seq.) (IFCA), section 212(f) of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 (8 U.S.C. 1182(f)), and section 301 of title 3, United States Code,

	I, BARACK OBAMA, President of the United States of America, have determined that Iran's implementation of the nuclear related measures specified in sections 15.1-15.11 of Annex V of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action of July 14, 2015 (JCPOA) between the P5+1 (China, France, Germany, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, and the United States), the European Union, and Iran, as verified by the International Atomic Energy Agency, marks a fundamental shift in circumstances with respect to Iran's nuclear program. In order to give effect to the United States commitments with respect to sanctions described in section 4 of Annex II and section 17.4 of Annex V of the JCPOA, I am revoking Executive Orders 13574 of May 23, 2011, 13590 of November 20, 2011, 13622 of July 30, 2012, and 13645 of June 3, 2013, and amending Executive Order 13628 of October 9, 2012, by revoking sections 5 through 7 and section 15. In addition, in section 3 of this order, I am taking steps with respect to the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12957 of March 15, 1995, to provide implementation authorities for aspects of certain statutory sanctions that are outside the scope of the U.S. commitment to lift nuclear-related sanctions under the JCPOA.

	This action is not intended to, and does not, limit the applicability of waiver determinations or any renewals thereof issued by the Secretary of State, or licenses issued by the Secretary of the Treasury, to give effect to sanctions commitments described in sections 17.1-17.3 and 17.5 of Annex V of the JCPOA, or otherwise affect the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12957, which shall remain in place, or any Executive Order issued in furtherance of that national emergency other than Executive Orders 13574, 13590, 13622, 13628, and 13645.

	I hereby order:

	Section 1.  Revocation of Executive Orders.  The following Executive Orders are revoked:

	(a)  Executive Order 13574 of May 23, 2011 (Authorizing the Implementation of Certain Sanctions Set Forth in the Iran Sanctions Act of 1996, as Amended);

	(b)  Executive Order 13590 of November 20, 2011 (Authorizing the Imposition of Certain Sanctions With Respect to the Provision of Goods, Services, Technology, or Support for Iran's Energy and Petrochemical Sectors);

	(c)  Executive Order 13622 of July 30, 2012 (Authorizing Additional Sanctions With Respect to Iran); and 

	(d)  Executive Order 13645 of June 3, 2013 (Authorizing the Implementation of Certain Sanctions Set Forth in the Iran Freedom and Counter-Proliferation Act of 2012 and Additional Sanctions With Respect To Iran).

	Sec. 2.  Amendment of Executive Order.  Executive Order 13628 of October 9, 2012 (Authorizing the Implementation of Certain Sanctions Set Forth in the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012 and Additional Sanctions with Respect to Iran), is amended by:

	(a)  Revoking current sections 5 through 7 and 15;

	(b)  Revising current section 4 by removing "section 5 of Executive Order 13622 of July 30, 2012," in subsection (a), replacing "section 12" with "section 9" in subsection (a), and replacing "section 12" with "section 9" in subsection (b);

	(c)  Revising current section 8 by inserting "and" between "2(a)," and "3(a)" and removing ", and 7(a)(iv)";

	(d)  Revising current section 9 by inserting "and" between "2(a)," and "3(a)" and removing ", and 7(a)(iv)";

	(e)  Revising current section 14 by inserting "and" between "2(a)," and "3(a)" and removing ", and 7(a)(iv)";

	(f)  Renumbering current sections 8 through 14 as sections 5 through 11, respectively; and

	(g)  Renumbering current sections 16 through 19 as sections 12 through 15, respectively.

	Sec. 3.  Provision of Implementation Authorities for Sanctions Outside the Scope of the JCPOA.

	(a)(i)  The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to impose on a person the measures described in subsection (a)(ii) of this section upon determining, pursuant to authority delegated by the President and in accordance with the terms of such delegation, that sanctions shall be imposed on such person pursuant to section 1244(c)(1)(A) of IFCA for knowingly providing significant financial, material, technological, or other support to, or goods or services in support of any activity or transaction on behalf of or for the benefit of persons described in section 1244(c)(2)(C)(iii) of IFCA.

	(ii)    With respect to any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury in accordance with this subsection to meet the criteria set forth in subsection (a)(i) of this section, all property and interests in property that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of any United States person (including any foreign branch) of such person are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in.

	(iii)   The prohibitions in subsection (a)(ii) of this section apply except to the extent provided by statutes, or in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the date of this order.

	(b)(i)  When the Secretary of State or the Secretary of the Treasury, pursuant to authority delegated by the President and in accordance with the terms of such delegation, has determined that sanctions shall be imposed on a person pursuant to sections 1244(d)(1)(A), 1245(a)(1), or 1246(a)(1) of IFCA (including in each case as informed by section 1253(c)(2) of IFCA) for engaging in transactions or activities outside the scope of the waiver determinations as to IFCA issued by the Secretary of State to give effect to sanctions commitments described in sections 17.1-17.3 and 17.5 of Annex V of the JCPOA, and any renewals thereof, such Secretary may select one or more of the sanctions set forth below to impose on that person, and the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, shall take the following actions where necessary to implement the sanctions selected and maintained by the Secretary of State or the Secretary of the Treasury:

	(A)  prohibit any United States financial institution from making loans or providing credits to the sanctioned person totaling more than $10,000,000 in any 12-month period, unless such person is engaged in activities to relieve human suffering and the loans or credits are provided for such activities;

	(B)  prohibit any transactions in foreign exchange that are subject to the jurisdiction of the United States and in which the sanctioned person has any interest;

	(C)  prohibit any transfers of credit or payments between financial institutions or by, through, or to any financial institution, to the extent that such transfers or payments are subject to the jurisdiction of the United States and involve any interest of the sanctioned person;

	(D)  block all property and interests in property that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of any United States person (including any foreign branch) of the sanctioned person, and provide that such property and interests in property may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in;

	(E)  prohibit any United States person from investing in or purchasing significant amounts of equity or debt instruments of a sanctioned person;

	(F)  restrict or prohibit imports of goods, technology, or services, directly or indirectly, into the United States from the sanctioned person; or

	(G)  impose on the principal executive officer or officers, or persons performing similar functions and with similar authorities, of a sanctioned person the sanctions described in subsections (b)(i)(A)-(F) of this section, as selected by the Secretary of State or the Secretary of the Treasury, as appropriate.

	(ii)    The prohibitions in subsection (b)(i) of this section apply except to the extent provided by statutes, or in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the date of this order.

	(c)(i)  All property and interests in property that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of any United States person (including any foreign branch) of the following persons are blocked and may not be transferred, paid, exported, withdrawn, or otherwise dealt in:  any person determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with or at the recommendation of the Secretary of State:

	(A)  to have engaged, on or after January 2, 2013, in corruption or other activities relating to the diversion of goods, including agricultural commodities, food, medicine, and medical devices, intended for the people of Iran;

	(B)  to have engaged, on or after January 2, 2013, in corruption or other activities relating to the misappropriation of proceeds from the sale or resale of goods described in subsection (c)(i)(A) of this section;

	(C)  to have materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services to or in support of, the activities described in subsection (c)(i)(A) or (c)(i)(B) of this section or any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to subsection (c)(i) of this section; or

	(D)  to be owned or controlled by, or to have acted or purported to act for or on behalf of, directly or indirectly, any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to subsection (c)(i) of this section.

	(ii)    The prohibitions in subsection (c)(i) of this section apply except to the extent provided by statutes, or in regulations, orders, directives, or licenses that may be issued pursuant to this order, and notwithstanding any contract entered into or any license or permit granted prior to the date of this order.

	Sec. 4.  Donations.  I hereby determine that, to the extent section 203(b)(2) of IEEPA (50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(2)) may apply, the making of donations of the types of articles specified in such section by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order would seriously impair my ability to deal with the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12957, and I hereby prohibit such donations as provided by subsections 3(a)(ii), 3(b)(i)(D), and 3(c)(i) of this order.

	Sec. 5.  Prohibitions.  The prohibitions in subsections 3(a)(ii), 3(b)(i)(D), and 3(c)(i) of this order include but are not limited to:

	(a)  the making of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services by, to, or for the benefit of any person whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order; and

	(b)  the receipt of any contribution or provision of funds, goods, or services from any such person.

	Sec. 6.  Entry into the United States.  I hereby find that the unrestricted immigrant and nonimmigrant entry into the United States of aliens who are determined to meet one or more of the criteria in subsections 3(a)(i) and 3(c)(i) of this order would be detrimental to the interests of the United States, and I hereby suspend the entry into the United States, as immigrants or nonimmigrants, of such persons as of the date of this order.  Such persons shall be treated as persons covered by section 1 of Proclamation 8693 of July 24, 2011 (Suspension of Entry of Aliens Subject to United Nations Security Council Travel Bans and International Emergency Economic Powers Act Sanctions).

	Sec. 7.  General Authorities.  The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, is hereby authorized to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this order, other than the purposes described in section 6 of this order.  The Secretary of the Treasury may redelegate any of these functions to other officers and agencies of the United States Government consistent with applicable law.

	Sec. 8.  Evasion and Conspiracy.  (a)  Any transaction that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, causes a violation of, or attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.

	(b)  Any conspiracy formed to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.

	Sec. 9.  Definitions.  For the purposes of this order:

	(a)  the term "entity" means a partnership, association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization;

	(b)  the term "financial institution," as used in subsection 3(b) of this order, includes:

	(i)    a depository institution (as defined in section 3(c)(1) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) (12 U.S.C. 1813(c)(1)), including a branch or agency of a foreign bank (as defined in section 1(b)(7) of the International Banking Act of 1978) (12 U.S.C. 3101(7));

	(ii)   a credit union;

	(iii)  a securities firm, including a broker or dealer;

	(iv)   an insurance company, including an agency or underwriter; and

	(v)    any other company that provides financial services;

	(c)  the term "Government of Iran" includes the Government of Iran, any political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof, including the Central Bank of Iran, and any person owned or controlled by, or acting for or on behalf of, the Government of Iran;

	(d)  the term "Iran" means the Government of Iran and the territory of Iran and any other territory or marine area, including the exclusive economic zone and continental shelf, over which the Government of Iran claims sovereignty, sovereign rights, or jurisdiction, provided that the Government of Iran exercises partial or total de facto control over the area or derives a benefit from economic activity in the area pursuant to international arrangements;

	(e)  the term "person" means an individual or entity;

	(f)  the term "sanctioned person" means a person that the Secretary of State or the Secretary of the Treasury, pursuant to authority delegated by the President and in accordance with the terms of such delegation, has determined is a person on whom sanctions shall be imposed pursuant to section 1244(d)(1)(A), 1245(a)(1), or 1246(a)(1) of IFCA (including in each case as informed by section 1253(c)(2) of IFCA) for engaging in transactions or activities outside the scope of the waiver determinations as to IFCA issued by the Secretary of State to give effect to sanctions commitments described in sections 17.1‑17.3 and 17.5 of Annex V of the JCPOA, and any renewals thereof, and on whom the Secretary of State or the Secretary of the Treasury has imposed any of the sanctions in subsection 3(b) of this order;

	g)  the term "United States financial institution" means a financial institution as defined in subsection (b) of this section (including its foreign branches) organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States or located in the United States; and

	(h)  the term "United States person" means any United States citizen, permanent resident alien, entity organized under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the United States (including foreign branches), or any person in the United States.

	Sec. 10.  Notice.  For those persons whose property and interests in property are blocked pursuant to this order who might have a constitutional presence in the United States, I find that because of the ability to transfer funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice to such persons of measures to be taken pursuant to this order would render those measures ineffectual.  I therefore determine that for these measures to be effective in addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 12957, there need be no prior notice of an action taken pursuant to subsection 3(a)(ii), 3(b)(i)(D), or 3(c)(i) of this order.

	Sec. 11.  Direction to Agencies.  All agencies of the United States Government are hereby directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of this order.

	Sec. 12.  Rights.  This order is not intended to, and does not, create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or in equity by any party against the United States, its departments, agencies, or entities, its officers, employees, or agents, or any other person.

	Sec. 13.  Effect on Actions or Proceedings.  Pursuant to section 202 of the NEA (50 U.S.C. 1622), the revocation of Executive Orders 13574, 13590, 13622, and 13645 and the amendments to Executive Order 13628 as set forth in sections 1 and 2 of this order, shall not affect any action taken or proceeding pending not finally concluded or determined as of the date of this order, or any action or proceeding based on any act committed prior to the date of this order, or any rights or duties that matured or penalties that were incurred prior to the date of this order.

	Sec. 14.  Relationship to Algiers Accords.  The measures taken pursuant to this order are in response to actions of the Government of Iran occurring after the conclusion of the 1981 Algiers Accords, and are intended solely as a response to those later actions.

	 

	BARACK OBAMA

	THE WHITE HOUSE,

	    January 16, 2016.

	Say a hardworking American loses his job — we shouldn’t just make sure he can get unemployment insurance; we should make sure that program encourages him to retrain for a business that’s ready to hire him. If that new job doesn’t pay as much, there should be a system of wage insurance in place so that he can still pay his bills.
	
		President Obama, State of the Union 2016


	Building on his remarks in his State of the Union, today the President used his Weekly Address to announce new proposals to provide workers with wage insurance, stronger Unemployment Insurance protections, and support for retraining to get the next job. These proposals are part of the Administration’s broader push to strengthen and modernize our Unemployment Insurance system by closing holes in coverage and strengthening connections to work. 

	After the worst economic crisis of our lifetimes, the United States is in the midst of the longest streak of private-sector job growth in our history, with more than 14 million new jobs created during the past 70 months.  Yet even as the unemployment rate has had its fastest two-year decline in thirty years – and has been cut in half overall - we have further work to do to strengthen our safety net and modernize it for a changing economy. Unfortunately, even as the economy has strengthened, fewer than one in three unemployed Americans receive unemployment insurance benefits today.

	The President has always been committed to ensuring that if Americans work hard they are able to get ahead. Through his efforts to raise the minimum wage, modernize overtime rules and secure paid leave for American workers, the President has advanced the principle that a hard day’s work should be rewarded by good pay, decent benefits, and the ability for workers to care for their loved ones. In this era of rapid change, we need to modernize our policies that offer workers opportunity and security through health care, retirement, and an opportunity to advance in their careers. The proposal the President announced in his Weekly Address today is designed to ensure that if a worker loses her job, she has essential protections against economic insecurity that also help her retool and find a new job. 

	The President’s proposal contains three core elements:


Protecting Workers with Wage Insurance:  The President’s plan would ensure workers have access to wage insurance that would replace half of lost wages, up to $10,000 over two years. Displaced workers making less than $50,000 who were with their prior employer for at least three years would be able to leverage these resources to help them get back on their feet and on the way to a new career.

Strengthening Unemployment Insurance (UI): The President’s plan would address holes in our UI system – including by expanding coverage to part-time, many low-income, and intermittent workers, and workers who leave work for compelling family reasons. It would also ensure that states provide at minimum 26 weeks of coverage. 

Making it Easier for Workers to Retool and Retrain:  The President’s plan would make it easier for companies to avoid lay-offs through work-sharing, while incentivizing states to offer and allow retraining for workers on UI or to provide relocation vouchers or subsidized employment. In addition, it would expand intensive career counseling to the long-term unemployed, discouraged, and part-time workers.


	More detail on these proposals – which are paid for and will be described further in the President’s forthcoming budget – is below. 

1. Protecting Workers with Wage Insurance

	The President has put forward an agenda that grows middle-class jobs, fights to lift the minimum wage, and invests in jobs-driven skills training to improve all Americans’ ability to secure a well-paying job. But the challenge for experienced workers who lose their jobs is particularly stark, as they may struggle to find work that pays as much as their prior job – both making it harder to make ends meet and leading them to stay on the sidelines. 

	Experienced workers who lose their jobs through no fault of their own can face lasting consequences – as many of the same skills and experience that may have earned them higher salaries and raises at their previous job may no longer count when they are required to look for work again. On average, experienced workers starting over find themselves earning wages 10 percent or more below what they took home in the jobs they lost, and workers with more than twenty years of experience in their prior job face wages that are nearly a quarter less than what they made before.

Under the President’s proposal, a modern system of wage insurance would help experienced workers make ends meet as they transition into a new job and start moving back up the ladder.

Providing wage insurance to help displaced workers get back in the game. The President’s proposal would require states to provide wage insurance for workers displaced through no fault of their own from jobs they had held for at least three years. Wage insurance would encourage workers to put their skills back to work quickly so that experienced workers do not join the ranks of the long-term unemployed or leave the workforce entirely. 

Replacing half of lost wages for experienced workers. Under the President’s proposal, wage insurance would replace up to half of lost wages for workers who had worked three years or more at their previous employment and make less than $50,000 in their new job. Workers could receive up to $10,000 over two years to help make ends meet through a Federally-funded program administered directly through state unemployment insurance programs.  This proposal would be fully paid-for as part of the President’s broader unemployment insurance package described below.

2. Strengthening Unemployment Insurance (UI)

	Unemployment Insurance is one of our most important protections for workers for who fall on tough times - last year alone over seven million workers relied on UI to get by in tough times – and during the Great Recession, UI was one of the most important policies for combatting further economic downturn. But changing times have weakened these protections. 

	UI coverage is at its lowest levels in at least half a century. Today, fewer than one in three unemployed Americans receive UI benefits even though over 90 percent of employees have some taxes paid on their wages that support the UI system. 

	Our economy has changed since 1935 when UI was first introduced – for example, women today are twice as likely to work, new industries have emerged, and businesses have created new ways of organizing work. As a result of all of these changes, many workers fall through cracks in our UI system. In addition, UI benefits now replace a smaller percentage of wages than before – making it harder for unemployed workers to make ends meet while looking for a new job.

The President’s proposals would modernize the Unemployment Insurance System to protect more working families, restore system solvency, and help the Nation weather future economic crises. 

 The President’s proposals, which are paid-for, would ensure Americans can rely on UI to provide basic support during difficult times by expanding coverage and ensuring states have the resources to provide benefits. In addition, the President’s proposals would restore state UI program solvency, ensure each state has sufficient reserves to withstand future economic downturns, and provide a robust program that supports families and helps spur economic recovery in communities.

	The President’s proposals build on the track-record of success from the $7 billion made available through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act to encourage states to expand coverage. With those resources, more than thirty states have implemented and sustained important UI reforms. The proposals put forward below, paid for in the President’s Fiscal Year 2017 Budget, would go further by making many of those reforms the national standard.

Expand coverage to protect low-income and vulnerable workers. The President’s proposal would require that state UI programs cover workers that currently fall through the cracks, including part-time workers, newer labor market entrants, certain low-income and intermittent earners, and workers who leave work for compelling family reasons such as to move with a spouse, escape domestic violence, or care for an ill family member. States could receive incentives for improving benefit levels and extending coverage to workers in growing non-traditional forms of employment, like temporary employment services workers. 

Restore standard UI maximum benefit duration to 26 weeks. For the first time in over 50 years, nine states have cut their maximum UI benefit duration to less than 26 weeks – some, such as North Carolina now provide only up to 13 weeks. Even during the current economic recovery, an historically high 38 percent of workers exhaust their state-provided UI benefits. The President’s proposals would reverse this damaging erosion of state UI benefit duration by requiring that all state programs provide at least 26 weeks of coverage, consistent with the historic norm. 

Automatically extend benefits in the face of economic recessions. Unemployment insurance is one of the most effective tools to increase economic resilience. During the Great Recession, UI is credited with saving 1.75 million jobs and replacing one-fifth of the economy’s lost demand. From 2008 to 2013, extended unemployment insurance benefits helped nearly 24 million workers, lifting 2.5 million people out of poverty in 2012 alone. However, Congress has to enact extended benefits each time a recession hits, and often fails to act quickly enough for first-hit states or to extend benefits long enough for those hardest hit. The President’s proposal would create a permanent program of extended UI benefits that would automatically provide up to 52 additional weeks of federally-funded benefits for states experiencing rapid job-losses or high unemployment. 

Restore solvency and ensure unemployment insurance for the long-term. Three out of five state UI programs are insolvent. Thirty-six states exited the Great Recession having relied on emergency federal loans. More than $7 billion in loans are outstanding today and even more is being borrowed through the private markets. Currently only 20 states have sufficient reserves to weather a single year of recession. Low state reserves remain a serious threat to unemployment insurance for working Americans. The President’s proposal would put state unemployment insurance programs on a path to permanent solvency while insuring they have sufficient reserves to weather the next economic crisis. The proposal would modernize federal unemployment insurance taxes and hold states accountable for maintaining sufficient reserves to provide benefits for at least six months of an average economic recession. 

3. Making It Easier for Workers To Retool and Retrain

	Unemployment Insurance should be as much about facilitating re-employment as about providing support to make ends meet while looking for a new job. As our economy continues to change and evolve, getting that next job may require preparing for new opportunities in new industries and new fields. The President’s proposals encourage states to make it easier for workers to retool and retrain and provide workers with the guidance and support they need to gain new, relevant skills. These proposals build on the successes of the President’s job-driven training agenda, which has aligned over $1 billion in annual job training grants with job-driven training best practices and put the most new apprentices into training in nearly a decade, among other accomplishments.

The President’s proposals would help employers avoid lay-offs in the first place and provide unemployed workers with more opportunities and advice to train for the skills that will land them their next job.

Prevent lay-offs before they happen. Work-sharing, also known as short-time compensation, can help employers hold onto their workers and avoid mass layoffs that can lead to long-term unemployment and hardship for working families and their communities. The President’s proposal would provide implementation grants and additional incentives to states for work-sharing programs that help employers reduce hours instead of laying off workers while providing partial unemployment benefits to workers whose hours are cut. 

Strategies to help unemployed workers reconnect to the workplace. The President’s proposals would provide states with incentives to directly link jobseekers to work as a reemployment strategy by providing states with incentives to adopt work and training-related reforms. For example, states would receive incentives to create temporary work-based training programs to help workers get back on the job and to allow workers to continue receiving UI benefits while participating in an apprenticeship or on-the-job training. States could also receive funds for relocation assistance programs to help workers pursue new opportunities in a different community based coupled with expert guidance on there might be new possibilities. 

Providing 21st Century Career Navigation.  The President’s Budget will propose to provide new resources to states for Career Navigators who instead will proactively reach out to every worker who is most at risk of not being able to reset their careers after being unemployed:  (1) the long-term unemployed who have been unemployed for approximately six months or more; (2) discouraged workers who have dropped out of the labor force altogether; and (3) people who are only able to find part time work. Career Navigators will help them find a job, match with an appropriate training program, and connect to federal support services. This proposal will expand intensive counseling services to more than 1 million people annually. The President is also proposing the expansion of in-person reemployment services to the one-third of UI beneficiaries most at risk of exhausting their benefits, as well as all returning veterans who are receiving UI. 

Building on a Track Record of Success

	The President’s proposals for strengthening and modernizing the UI system build on the success of important reforms incentivized through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act and additional modernization efforts launched through the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012.

	The Recovery Act provided states an opportunity to receive up to $7 billion in incentives for expanding coverage and improving benefits. With those resources, well-over thirty states have implemented and sustained important UI reforms – from Maryland which introduced the alternative base period to cover workers with shorter work histories and provided benefits to part-time workers to Oklahoma which also reformed its system to protect workers who have to leave work for compelling family reasons. In addition, through the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, 28 states now have work-sharing programs, also known as short-time compensation, that conform with federal standards. In addition to the states that updated their laws to create model work-sharing programs, six of these states used incentives provided in the Act to create new programs within the past few years.. From 2008 to 2013, extended unemployment insurance benefits helped nearly 24 million workers, lifting 2.5 million people out of poverty in 2012 alone.  The experience of so many states with these reforms has helped lay the groundwork for making these policies the national standard.

The President today, in response to a request from the Governor submitted on January 14, 2016, declared that an emergency exists in the State of Michigan and ordered federal aid to supplement state and local response efforts due to the emergency conditions in the area affected by contaminated water.

The President's action authorizes the Department of Homeland Security, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), to coordinate all disaster relief efforts which have the purpose of alleviating the hardship and suffering caused by the emergency on the local population, and to provide appropriate assistance for required emergency measures, authorized under Title V of the Stafford Act, to save lives and to protect property and public health and safety, and to lessen or avert the threat of a catastrophe in Genesee County.

Specifically, FEMA is authorized to identify, mobilize, and provide at its discretion, equipment and resources necessary to alleviate the impacts of the emergency.  Emergency protective measures, limited to direct federal assistance, will be provided at 75 percent federal funding.  This emergency assistance is to provide water, water filters, water filter cartridges, water test kits, and other necessary related items for a period of no more than 90 days.  

Additionally, the President offered assistance in identifying other Federal agency capabilities that could support the recovery effort but do not require an emergency declaration under the Stafford Act.

W. Craig Fugate, Administrator, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Department of Homeland Security, named David G. Samaniego as the Federal Coordinating Officer for federal recovery operations in the affected area.  

	FOR FURTHER INFORMATION MEDIA SHOULD CONTACT:  FEMA NEWS DESK AT (202) 646-3272 OR FEMA-NEWS-DESK@DHS.GOV

 

###

	TEXT OF A LETTER FROM THE PRESIDENT
	TO THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
	AND THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE

	January 16, 2016

	Dear Mr. Speaker: (Dear Mr. President:)

	Pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.) (IEEPA), I hereby report that I have issued an Executive Order (the "order") revoking Executive Orders 13574, 13590, 13622, and 13645 with respect to Iran and amending Executive Order 13628 with respect to Iran in order to give effect to the United States commitments with respect to sanctions described in section 4 of Annex II and section 17.4 of Annex V of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action of July 14, 2015 (JCPOA) between the P5+1 (China, France, Germany, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, and the United States), the European Union (EU), and Iran. In addition, the order takes steps to provide implementation authorities for aspects of certain statutory sanctions that are outside the scope of the U.S. commitments to lift nuclear-related sanctions under the JCPOA.

	In Executive Order 12957 of March 15, 1995, the President found that the actions and policies of the Government of Iran threaten the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States. To deal with that threat, the President declared a national emergency and imposed prohibitions on certain transactions with respect to the development of Iranian petroleum resources. To further respond to that threat and to provide implementing authority for Iran-related sanctions legislation including the Iran Sanctions Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-172) (50 U.S.C. 1701 note); certain statutory requirements of the Comprehensive Iran Sanctions, Accountability, and Divestment Act of 2010 (Public Law 111-195) (22 U.S.C. 8501 et seq.); section 1245(c) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012 (Public Law 112 81) (22 U.S.C. 8513a); certain statutory requirements of the Iran Threat Reduction and Syria Human Rights Act of 2012 (Public Law 112-158) (22 U.S.C. 8701 et seq.); and certain statutory requirements of the Iran Freedom and Counter Proliferation Act of 2012 (subtitle D of title XII of Public Law 112-239) (22 U.S.C. 8801 et seq.) (IFCA) the President issued Executive Order 12959 of May 6, 1995, Executive Order 13059 of August 19, 1997, Executive Order 13553 of September 28, 2010, Executive Order 13574 of May 23, 2011, Executive Order 13590 of November 20, 2011, Executive Order 13599 of February 5, 2012, Executive Order 13606 of April 22, 2012, Executive Order 13608 of May 1, 2012, Executive Order 13622 of July 30, 2012, Executive Order 13628 of October 9, 2012, and Executive Order 13645 of June 3, 2013.

	On July 14, 2015, the P5+1, the EU, and Iran announced the JCPOA, which will verifiably prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon and ensure that Iran's nuclear program will be exclusively peaceful. The JCPOA provides for the lifting of nuclear-related sanctions on Iran in exchange for Iran's completion of specified nuclear-related steps, as verified by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

	I have determined that Iran's implementation of the nuclear related measures specified in sections 15.1-15.11 of Annex V of the JCPOA, as verified by the IAEA, marks a fundamental shift in circumstances with respect to Iran's nuclear program. In order to give effect to the United States commitments with respect to sanctions described in section 4 of Annex II and section 17.4 of Annex V of the JCPOA, section 1 of the order revokes Executive Orders 13574, 13590, 13622, and 13645 in their entirety. Section 2 of the order amends Executive Order 13628 by revoking sections 5 through 7 and section 15 of that order, revising cross references in the remaining sections of that order to the revoked sections, and renumbering the remaining sections of that order.

	Section 3(a) of the order provides implementation authority for aspects of section 1244(c)(1)(A) of IFCA; this provision only applies to the extent sanctions are imposed with respect to transactions or activities that are outside the scope of the JCPOA, specifically, providing significant financial, material, technological, or other support to, or goods and services in support of, any activity or transaction on behalf of or for the benefit of persons described in section 1244(c)(2)(C)(iii) of IFCA (i.e., Iranian persons on the list of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (SDN List)).

	Section 3(b) of the order provides implementation authority for aspects of sections 1244(d)(1)(A), 1245(a)(1), and 1246(a)(1) of IFCA; this provision only applies to the extent sanctions are imposed with respect to transactions or activities that are outside the scope of the JCPOA, as reflected in waiver determinations as to sections 1244(d)(1)(A), 1245(a)(1), and 1246(a)(1) of IFCA issued by the Secretary of State to give effect to sanctions commitments described in sections 17.1-17.3 and 17.5 of Annex V of the JCPOA (including any transactions or activities involving persons on the SDN List), and any renewals thereof.

	Section 3(c) of the order provides implementation authority for section 1249 of IFCA, which is outside the scope of the JCPOA.

	I have delegated to the Secretary of the Treasury the authority, in consultation with the Secretary of State, to take such actions, including the promulgation of rules and regulations, and to employ all powers granted to the President by IEEPA, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of the order, other than the purposes described in section 6 of the order. All agencies of the United States Government are directed to take all appropriate measures within their authority to carry out the provisions of the order.

	I am enclosing a copy of the Executive Order I have issued.

	Sincerely,

	BARACK OBAMA

	WASHINGTON, DC — In this week's address, the President spoke about the steps we need to take to modernize our unemployment insurance system.  Our country has come a long way in the past seven years, with more than 14 million jobs created, and the unemployment rate cut in half.  But, as our economy continues to change, there are still steps we need to take to ensure all Americans have the security and opportunity they deserve.  In his address, the President laid out his plan to help more hardworking Americans get unemployment insurance, find a new job, and have some assurance that even if a new job pays less than their old one they will have some help paying the bills.  These ideas are part of the President’s broader belief that everybody who works hard deserves their fair shot and the chance to get ahead.

	The audio of the address and video of the address will be available online at www.whitehouse.gov at 6:00 a.m. ET, January 16, 2016.
